
===== PAGE 1 =====
1S.F 7XAM-(M)2017 	ow 	
%ref DETACHABLE 
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING 
Paper II 
Maximum Marks: 200 
Time Allowed : Three Hours 
QUESTION PAPER SPECIFIC INSTRUCTIONS 
Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting questions. 
There are EIGHT questions in all, out of which FIVE are to be attempted. 
Question Nos. I and 5 are compulsory. Out of the remaining SIX questions, THREE are to be 
attempted selecting at least ONE question from each of the two Sections A and B. 
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck off, attempt of a question 
shall be counted even if attempted partly. Any page or portion of the page left blank in the 
Question-cum-Answer Booklet must be clearly struck off. 
All questions carry equal.  marks. The number of marks carried by a question/part is indicated 
against it. 
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only. 
Unless otherwise mentioned, symbols and notations have their usual standard meanings. 
Assume suitable data, if necessary and indicate the same clearly. 
Neat sketches may be drawn, wherever required. 
SECTION 'A' 
Differentiate between promoter, inhibitor and accelerator for a chemical reaction. 	
8 
Derive Maxwell's relation and state their importance. 	
8 
Explain Henry's law and show that Raoult's law is a special case of Henry's law. 	
8 
What is the effect of pressure on equilibrium conversion of a gas-phase chemical reaction? 
8 
State 'yield' and 'selectivity' of a process. 	
8 
2.(a) 	
Discuss thefollowing with suitable examples: 	
20 
Limiting and excess reactant 
Recycle and bypass ratio 
Bypass and purge streams 
Trouton's rule and Kistiakowslcy equation 
2.(b) 	
An ideal gas (Cp = 5 kcal/kmol-°C, Cv =3 kcal/lcmol-°C) is changed from 1 atm and 22-4 m3 
to 10 atm and 2.24 m3 by the following reversible processes: 
isothermal compression 
adiabatic compression followed by cooling at constant volume 
heating at constant volume followed by cooling at constant pressure 
Calculate the heat interaction, work-done, change in internal energy and change in enthalpy of 
the overall process in each case. 	
20 
1 	
fsi-d-chme
===== PAGE 2 =====
A mixture of 1 mol of sulphur dioxide gas, 0.5 mol of oxygen gas and 2 moles of argon gas 
are fed into a reactor at 30 bar and 900 K to produce sulphur trioxide gas. The equilibrium 
constant for the reaction is 6. Calculate the degree of conversion and equilibrium composition 
of the reaction mixture assuming that the mixture behaves like an ideal gas. 	 15 
Derive an expression for the design equation of a CSTR. 	
15 
Bring out the criteria for vapour-liquid equilibria. 	 .- 	
10 
The-gas phase reaction A + B --> C + D + E is carried out in-a .CSIR by introducing a feed 
stream containing 5 kmol/m3 of B. The reactor volume is 25 m3. and the rate constant is 
0.0001 m3ikmol.s at the condition of temperature and pressure in. the reactor. Calculate the 
volumetric flow rate, space time and reaction holding time for 60% conversion of the 
reactants. 	
15 
Discuss and bring out the significance of the terms — Fugacity, Activity and Chemical Potential. 
15 
A binary liquid mixture consists of 60 mol per cent ethylene and 40 mol per cent propylene. 
At 423 K, the vapour pressure of ethylene and propylene are 15-2 atm and 9.8 atm respec-
tively. Calculate the total pressure and equilibrium composition of the vapour phase. Assume . 
that the mixture behaves like an ideal solution. 	
10 
SECTION 'B' 
5.(a) 	
Justify — 'Creation and destruction of ozone are well-balanced in nature, but still ozone layer 
is being depleted'. 	
8 
54)) 	
Write an informatory note on 'Break-even point analysis'. 	
8 
5.(c) 	
What is adiabatic lapse rate ? How does it affect the dispersion of pollutants? 	8 
5.(d) 	
Enumerate the factors that influence the location and economy of a commercial plant. 	
8 
5.(e) 	
Compare and contrast between enzymatic and microbial fermentation. 	
8 
Elucidate the methodology of biodiesel production employing heterogeneous transesterification 
of a second generation non-edible oil. 	
15 
Explain with neat sketch the working principle of an electrostatic precipitator. 	15 
A piece of equipment having negligible salvage and scrap value is estimated to have a service 
life of 10 years. The original cost of the equipment was Rs. 50,000. Determine the following: 
the depreciation charge for the 5th year if sum-of-the-years-digits depreciation is used. 
the depreciation charge for the 5th year if straight line method is used. 
the % of the original investment paid offin the first half of the service life using the sum-of- 
the-years-digits method. 	
10 
Explain with flow diagram the manufacturing of Portland cement by wet process and discuss 
the chemical reactions associated with the process. 	
15 
Illustrate the terms 'discounted cash flow' and `project scheduling' with suitable example. 15 
Emphasize with logical diagram on the term 'HAZOP' that provides a balance between 
operability problems and hazards identified. 	
10 
Elucidate the safety measures to be taken into account in the ammonia manufacturing plant. 
15 
Discuss the different processes of dispersion of starch into LDPE for enhancing the mechanical 
properties of produced polymer film. 	
15 
Give an account of various mathematical methods for profitability evaluation considering the 
advantages and disadvantages concerned with them. 	
10 
fsi-d-chme 	
2