: BTS-D-GSEC
GENERAL STUDIES, ESSAY AND COMPREHENSION
fafa aaa: a ae air Hz: 200
Time Allowed : Three Hours Maximum Marks : 200
wea-wa & fore fafire orqaer

Prerferfera sete sien at, real & sat a4 a agct, ares Ve oF

ww: seat & HR dar sitar 2 |
Wee CM 1 Seach site sistcht sat ower B 1 sea TH AT ah Le sree aa F fever ara aTieT 1 eft
at ghitaa ax car arity fs Race ar arean agi ure at a aadbt satealt ae F at @ 1 wane a
TRT-AE-FH GTB (FL AAT.) A eae Get Garr ea He HE A ATT BT IGS AAT ATT |

rer ae fark sith 3 ot 8 sth ser sits F & ere sifrart & |
wean Wea/Ter TTB siferewaT sie Tere TH ETE BL

We wer & ah unt & aR, weI-we-aet Glen F aah aa tare here ort aR 1 weai/seT HT
FoR ays rt TERY

SOR eR wer Te Tar &, ot aires aH at He ae Pn are | ate wea-wE-seR Gear F ais Fe aT aT
wreht ats far ver &, wt eR Ta a LIE: HI BAT START B |

Question Paper Specific Instructions

Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting questions.
All the SIX questions are to be attempted.
Question No. 1 is printed both in Hindi and in English. Answer to this shall be written either in
Hindi or English, conforming to the medium indicated in the Attendance list against the
name of the candidate. The same shall also be indicated by the candidate on the cover of the
Question-cum-Answer Booklet (QCA) in the space provided.
Other questions are printed in English only and should be attempted in English only.
The number of marks carried by a part / question is indicated against it.
All parts of a question shall be attempted at the place designated for them in the
Question-cum-Answer Booklet. Attempts of parts / questions shall be counted in sequential order.
Unless struck off, attempt of a part/question shall be counted even if attempted partly. Any page or
portion of the page left blank in the Question-cum-Answer Booklet must be clearly struck off.
BTS-D-GSEC 1

Qi. rafter 3a fd are oe cr 300 Weat (eaten) H aie fafa :
Write essays on any four of the following in about 300 words
each: (20x4=80)
(a) offs agers amite ay, afar % arta qveia
Civil wrong emerging from religious bigotry, constitutionally punishable
(bo) Rt geareh ae cheered ws seni : fifera Rada ara
Farm waiver is populistic and myopic : strategy change needed
(©) aie faere & geet At atk : ws ofa ohadt
From economic growth to well-being : a paradigm shift
(@)  aRam amite afasfiea ar aaa wea 2
Reservation suppresses civil dynamism
(e:) santa dag, soe A um sree aft
Non-performing parliament, unhealthy trend in Democracy
(Ren a ads age ges a steerer
Promoting innovative outlook in education
Q@2. Write arguments for and against each of the following
statements : (20x2=40)
(a) Privacy is an elitist idea.
(b) —_Note-ban, effective tool against black money.
BTS-D-GSEC 2

Q8. Write reports on the following in about 200 words each : (10x2=20)
(a) Data leak from Facebook
(b) Violence on University campuses during Student elections

Q4. Attempt a précis of the given passage in one-third of its length. Do not
suggest a title. Write, as far as possible, in your own words. The précis
must be written only in the précis-format given below : (5)

Language as culture has three important aspects. Culture is a

product of the history which it in turn reflects. Culture in other words is a
product and a reflection of human beings communicating with one another in
the very struggle to create wealth and to control it. But culture does not merely
reflect that history, or rather it does so by actually forming images or pictures
of the world of nature and nurture. Thus the second aspect of language as
cullure is as an image-forming agent in the mind of a child. Our whole
conception of ourselves as a people, individually and collectively, is based on
those pictures and images which may or may not correctly correspond to the
actual reality of the struggles with nature and nurture which produced them in
the first place. But our capacity to confront the world creatively is dependent on
how those images correspond or not to that reality, how they distort or clarify
the reality of our struggles. Language as culture is thus mediating between me
and my own self; between my own self and other selves; between me and
nature. Language is mediating in my very being. And this brings us to the third
aspect of language as culture. Culture transmits or imparts those images of the
world and reality through the spoken and the written language, that is
through a specific language. In other words, the capacity to speak, the capacity
to order sounds in a manner that makes for mutual comprehension between
human beings is universal. This is the universality of language, a quality

BTS-D-GSEC 3

specific to human beings. It corresponds to the universality of the struggle
against nature and that between human beings. But the particularity of the
sounds, the words, the word order into phrases and sentences, and the specific
manner, or laws, of their ordering is what distinguishes one language from
another. Thus a specific culture is not transmitted through language in its
universality but in its particularity as the language of a specific community
with a specific history. Written literature and orature are the main means by
which a particular language transmits the images of the world contained in the
culture it carries.

Language carries culture, and culture carries, particularly through
orature and literature, the entire body of values by which we come to perceive
ourselves and our place in the world. (395 words)

Q5. Read the following passage and answer the questions that
follow : (4x5=20)

The most essential and useful part to be played by our universities in

free India is to educate public opinion, which is the foundation of Democracy.
Every one has a right to educate public opinion, and so every school of thought,
in our own Republican Constitution, has been given ample freedom to win
public opinion, to its credit. It is here that true character is required and is
tested. Our country, today, needs, such people who possess a strong character,
who never stoop low to use questionable means under any circumstances. Those
who cherish the idea of becoming good administrators must essentially possess
a strong character. It should be the first and foremost function of our national
universities to impress upon the minds of the future administrators of our
country that in a true democracy there are no administrators but only servants
of the people.

BTS-D-GSEC 4

Another very essential and useful function of our universities should
be to build the character of our future citizens. The greatest drawback in our
educational institutions has been that sufficient attention was not paid to the
moulding of character of the students.

True interest of a country and its people cannot be served simply by
framing a Constitution. Constitution is just a set of rules and it can only be
effective when persons responsible for its operation prove to be true reformers
and real servants of the people and the nation.

Universities have to play a vital role. They should not teach politics to
the students simply with the view to make them acquainted with the political
structure of the country as well as of the world; but that it should be their
function to impress upon them that they are to protect, guide, change, and form
the Constitution of their country and then of the world as true citizens and
administrators of this democratic age, in body as well as spirit.

@ What are the essential functions of universities ?

Gi) What is the major drawback in our educational institutions ?

Gii) | Write the benefits of education imparted at universities.

Gv) How best can the educated youth serve the people and the nation as
administrators ?

(v) What is the contribution of the educated youth as enlightened citizens in
a democracy ?

BTS-D-GSEC 5

Q6. (a) Rewrite the sentences as directed : (1x10=10)
(i) The teacher said to me, “Are you not ashamed of telling a lie ?”
(Change into indirect speech)
Gi) You must complete the work by the end of this week.
(Change the voice)
Gii) Few students knew the answer, __?
(Put a question tag)
(iv) The minister was annoyed that he had not carried out his orders.
(Change into a simple sentence)
(v)  Shakuntalam is understood to be the best drama in Sanskrit.
(Change to comparative degree without changing the meaning)
(vi) As soon as he came, he made objections.
(Rewrite using “No sooner ...”)
(vii) The writer is evidently enamoured the subject.
(Fill in the blank with the correct preposition)
(viii) The paper was very easy. He could score high marks.
(Combine the sentences using “enough”)
(ix) We seldom see as others see us.
(Fill in the blank using a reflexive pronoun)
(x) IfI________ the Principal of the college, I would allow no
indiscipline.
(Fill in the blank using the correct form of the verb ‘be’)
BTS-D-GSEC 6

(b) Use the following words and phrases in sentences of your own so as to
bring out their meaning clearly : (2x5=10)
@ onthe wane
Gi) gourmand
(ii) debutant
(iv) plutocracy
(v) esoteric

(©) Correct the following sentences without making any unnecessary
changes : (1x5=5)
(i) Ibid him to hold his tongue.
Gi) She wasn’t her usual ebullient at the party.
(ii) They did not provide us any chairs to sit.
Gv) Under no circumstances passengers are permitted to open the

doors themselves.
(v) Lam seeing her enter the room.
BTS-D-GSEC 7