CDS Exam (1),2020
DO NOT OPEN THIS TEST BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO.
T.B.C. : PLKI-F-ENG Test Booklet Series
Serial
TEST BOOKLET

—_—

Time Allowed : Two Hours Maximum Marks : 100

aE

INSTRUCTIONS

1. IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD CHECK THAT
‘THIS TEST BOOKLET DOES NOT HAVE ANY UNPRINTED OR TORN OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS,
ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.

2. Please note that it is the candidate's responsibility to encode and fill in the Roll Number and Test
Booklet Series Code A, B, C or D carefully and without any omission or discrepancy at the
appropriate places in the OMR Answer Sheet. Any omission/discrepancy will render the Answer
Sheet liable for rejection.

3. You have to enter your Roll Number on the
Test Booklet in the Box provided alongside.

DO NOT write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4. This Test Booklet contains 120 items (questions). Each item comprises four responses (answers). You
will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is
more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose
ONLY ONE response for each item.

5. You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided. See directions
in the Answer Sheet.

6. Allitems carry equal marks.

a Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet,
you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you with your
Admission Certificate.

8. — After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has
concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to
take away with you the Test Booklet.

Ls Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.

10." Penalty for wrong answers :

‘THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE

OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.

There are four alternatives for the answer t every question. For each question for which a wrong answer
has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as
penalty.

Gi) Ifa candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given
answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.

ii) If a question is let blank, ic., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that
question.

‘DO NOT OPEN THIS TEST BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO

PLKI-F-ENG (1-A)

COMPREHENSION
Directions : In this section you have a few short passages. After each passage, you will find some items
based on the passage. First, read a passage and answer the items based on it. You are required to select
your answers based on the contents of the passage and opinion of the author only.
Passage -I 2. A significant number of people were sent to
carry out other work from agriculture because
Not all agricultural societies become (a) there were insufficient agricultural
civilizations, but no civilization can become one products.
without passing through the stage of agriculture. (b) people were needed to __ build
This is because at some stage in the development of monuments, weapons, jewellery, ete.
agriculture, as productivity improves, not all people (© there’ were sufficient agricultural
would need to be engaged in producing or procuring products.
food. A significant number of people could be freed (@ this enabled the development of
up to pursue other activities such as building walls civilizations.
ine for Jakvees bei ime tool's: ‘wind ind oe “agiboalbairs Kaaba” oclbtlas
weapons and jewellery; organizing long-distance roull etlerpe ms et iixaticeis 2
trade; creating new artistic masterpieces; coming up (a) "Bocietiea | Whisk © adbdived (thigh
with new inventions; keeping accounts; and perhaps productivity in agriculture had the
constructing new public infrastructure such as spploctuntiyepoiftnad timaltr allude
irrigation canals that further improve the ()):.  Bostotied whigh agpaddied on eetculeand
productivity of agriculture, thus realizing even more completely moved to other fruitful work
people to do new things s0 as to move to many places.
ie (© Societies which transitioned from one
‘This can happen, of course, only if a society stage of agriculture to another.
that has transitioned to _high-productivity (i) spate sites kad tated iseaitbace
agriculture has also, at some stage in its evolution, foe lank aff rdcuitee nabbed 15" othe:
found a way to channel the bonanza of free time work.
into other work fruitfully. In the ancient world, this
often involved creating new ideologies and new | 4 ° People as groups were convinced to do new
work through
hierarchies or power structures to coerce or
‘otherwise convince large groupe of people to devote OEE OSES ony
their time to the new tasks for very little reward. es
(b) ideologies, hierarchies and _ power
1, Which one of the following statements is true eit aoa
according to the author ? (© excessive agricultural products.
(a) Agriculture has always been part of all De gin ac
ene 5. Which word in the passage means
(b) _ Not all civilizations have undergone the ‘changeover’ ?
processes of agriculture. Gh. Dean
(© Agriculture gave birth to new pa a
civilizations
(@) Communities discontinued agriculture Or eterea
to become civilizations. (@ Hierarchies
PLKL-F-ENG (2-A)

Passage - I 7. Our expectations and predispositions may,
however, blind us because
When we pick up a newspaper, a book, or an J
nick CCE Baik Wok aas MNES Sule Seertain (a) we may not get the actual ideas of the
preconceptions and predispositions. We expect to author.
find a specific piece of information or be presented (b) we will get the actual ideas of the
with an argument or an analysis of something, say, author,
the likelihood of recession in the next six months or oh oe chap name pamthaariars
the reasons why children can't read. We probably
know a little about the book or article we are Se ee cee pee aoe
reading even before we start. There,was, after all, wea
some reason why we chose to read! one piece of |g Ono of the ways to improve our reading Kabits
writing rather than another. irs
Our expectations and predispositions may, (a) break the routine by changing the time
however, blind us to what the article and its author of reading.
is actually saying. If, for example, we are used to i Sree as ee
disagreeing with the author, we may see only what
. % (©) break the routine of reading the same
we expect to see and not what is actually there. Day
after day in our routine pattern of life we expose bok a cae
ourselves to the same newspaper, the same (@) stop reading for some time and then
magazine, even books by authors with the same restart reading.
perspectives, In order to reflect on our reading | | 1a. anes the author here advocat
habits and improve our skills we need to break out | ® 8 Abe ries Pet ee he
of this routine, step back and look at what we are baile pie
doing when we read. (a) Being objective to the ideas of the
author
6. According to the author, which one of the (Having preconceptions and
following statements ig not true? predispositions
(a) Reader's preconceptions influence their (©) Having continuous routines
reading. (a) Disagreeing with the author
(b) Readers have expectations when they| 19, Which word in the passage means
read an article or a book. ‘viewpoints’?
(©) Readers look for specific information in (a) Preconceptions
any of their readings. (0): Predispositions
(a) Readers assume that everything they (© Pattern
read will have new information. ay Peccoaclis
PLKL-F-ENG (3-A)

SPOTTING ERRORS
Directions: Each item in this section has a sentence with three underlined parts labelled as (a), (b) and (c).
Read each sentence to find out whether there is any error in any underlined part and indicate your response
on the Answer Sheet against the corresponding letter i.e., (a) or (6) or (c). If you find no error, your response
should be indicated as (d).
11. After mysteriously expanding for decades, Antarctica’s sea ice cover starting melting. No error
@) ©) o) @
12. The auction, conducted by the bank, will be price based using multiple priced method. No error
(a) ) © @
13. Ifthe scheme would have been implemented effectively all affected would have benefitted. No error
(a) () © @
14. Government Stock offers safety, liquidity and attractive returned for long duration. No error
(@) b) © @
15. Scrolling thorough my social media timeline, I hovered over a video of a minor road traffic accident.
@ ©) ©
No error
@
16. The fascination with gold at least seems to be a case were traditional belief and
(a) io)
modern finance would point the same way. No error
© @
17. Evolutionary biology leave us distinctly pessimistic about the possibility
(@) )
that altruism can arise naturally among humans. No error
© @
18, When everything starts working for you, you will find things are achieve and delivered,
(a) ) ©
No error
@
19. If were you I would not go for change of job. No error
(@) ©) © @
20. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, female literacy was extremely lowed
@ )
in comparison to male literacy. No error
© @
PLKI-F-ENG (4-A)

ORDERING OF WORDS IN A SENTENCE
Directions: Each of the following items in this section consists of a sentence, parts of which have been
jumbled. These parts have been labelled as P, Q, R and S. Given below each sentence are four sequences,
namely (a), (8), (c) and (d). You are required to re-arrange the jumbled parts of the sentence and mark your
response accordingly.
21. forlong and the backbone of India will continue to be the same agriculture has been
i Q R 8
(a) SPQR
(») SQPR
(© QRSP
(@)  QSRP
22. the cry of general public agenda in any country public policy making is generally driven by
P @ R s
(a) RQSP
() RPSQ
(© PSRQ
(@ RSP
23. before itstarts of the government is the essential power the power to manage conflict
P Q R s
(a) RSPQ
(») SQRP
(©) RQSP
(@  QRSP
24. a majority of the vote the party that received of the government must take control
P Q R s
(@) QPSR
(b) PSRQ
(©) RSPQ
(@) SQPR
25. can express a view on in which the electorate a particular issue of public policy
P Q R
a referendum is a vote
8
(a) SQPR
(b)  RPQS
(©) QRSP
(@) PQRS
PLKL-F-ENG (5-A)

26. in modern societies or merely suppressed has class conflict been resolved
P Q R 8
(a) RPSQ
(b) -RSPQ
(© PRSQ
(@) QRSP
27. several of our food are being extensively cultivated and vegetable crops _ hybrid varieties of
P Q R s
(a) QRSP
(&)  SPQR
(© QPRS
(@)  SPRQ
28. against the officer reason for the accusation there should have been
P Q R
ho was in-charge at that time
s
(a) RPSQ
(b) QPS
(©) PQRS
(@  SPRQ
29. poetry is and ideas powerful feelings the spontaneous overflow of
P Q R at s
(a) SRQP
(>) PQRS
(© RSQP
(@ PSRQ
80. historical identity and a common descent a group of people is called an.ethnic group
P Q R
who share a common culture,
Ss
(a) QSPR
(b)  QRPS
(©) PSQR
(@—RQPS
PLKI-F-ENG (6-A)

IDIOMS AND PHRASES
Directions: Given below are some idioms / phrases followed by four alternative meanings to each. Choose
the respgnse (a), (b), (c) or (d) which is the most appropriate expression and mark your response in the
Answer Sheet accordingly.
ait Anges 36. The pros and cons
(a) Person or organisation that appears (a) The good and bad parts of a situation
powerful, but actually is not (b) Like and dislike of a situation
(b) Person or organisation that acts like a (©) Abad experience in an event
tiger (@)_ A good moment of an event
(©) People who campaign for the protection
Ree ed 87. Prime the pump
cee aeeeneyil (a) To do. something in order to make
something succeed
82. Lily-livered (b) To do good things to succeed in life
(a) Brave and courageous (©) To’ do something in order to get bad
() Not brave things done
(© Comical (@) Asking people to do things to make
(ad. Outhagedus something succeed
35. ae the obbina 38. The green-eyed monster
(a) Eat fast (a) Feeling of being joyous
(b) Eatvery little (b) Feeling of being jealous
(© Eatalot (©) Feeling bad about happenings
(1 Prelancing ioibocatiog (a) Feeling lucky about something
34. The dog days 39. Rise to the occasion
é To celebrate a success in a difficult
(a) Days celebrating dogs Soy Te olan pine
(b) The bitter days (b) To regret a situation which ended in
(©) Thehottest days failure
(© To succeed in dealing with a difficult
(4) The coldest days Da aie. ae
(a) To motivate people to succeed in a
35. A banana republic difficult situation
(a) A small or poor country with a weak
government 40. Call it a day
(b) A small or poor country which produces (a) End of the day
bi
‘ad a (b) Completion of work
(© Accountry.which has been occupied by a i
big country (© Stop doing something
(a) Acountry without any government (d) A beautiful day
PLKLF-ENG (7-A)

ORDERING OF SENTENCES
Directions: In this section each item consists of six sentences of a passage. The first and the sixth sentences
are given in the beginning as S1 and S6. The middle four sentences in each have been jumbled up and
labelled as P, Q, R and S. You are required to find out the proper sequence of the four sentences and mark
your response accordingly on Answer Sheet.
41. S1: Chinua Achebe was born in 1930 and educated at the Government College in Umuahia,
Nigeria. *
86: Chinua Achebe has written over twenty books, including novels, stories, essays and collections
of poetry, and won the Nobel Prize for literature.
P: During the Civil War in Nigeria, he worked for the Biafran government service.
Q: After the War, he was appointed Senior Research Fellow at the University of Nigeria, Nsukka.
R: He joined the Nigerian Broadcasting Company in Lagos in 1954, later becoming its Director of
External Broadcasting.
S: He received a BA from London University in 1953 and in 1956 he studied broadcasting in
London at the BBC.
‘The correct sequence should be
(a) SRPQ
() RPQS
(© PQRS
(@) QRSP
42. S1: “Every person carries in his head a mental model of the world — a subjective representation of
external reality,” writes Alvin Toffler in Future Shock.
S86: When we begin to think we can do so only because our mind is already filled with all sorts of
ideas with which to think
P: It organizes our knowledge and gives us a place from which to argue.
Q: This mental model is, he says, like a giant filing cabinet.
R: It contains a slot for every item of information coming to us.
S: As E.F. Schumacher says, “When we think, we do not just think; we think ideas.”
‘The correct sequence should be
(a) PSRQ
(6) SPRQ
(© QRPS
@ RPS
PLKI-F-ENG (8-A)

43. S1: Biology is the study of life in its entirety.
86: Classical descriptive and clueless biology found a theoretical framework in the evolutionary
theory of Darwin.

P: In ater years, the focus was physiology and internal morphology or anatomy.

Q: Darwinian ideas of evolution by natural selection changed the perception completely.

R: The growth of biology as a natural science during the last 1000 years is interesting from many
points of view. ‘

S: One feature of this growth is changing emphasis from mere description of life forms to
identification and classification of all recorded living forms.

‘The correct sequence should be
(a) RSPQ (b)  SPRQ
(© QRPS (@)—- PQRS
44. S1: Biology is the youngest of the formalized disciplines of natural science.
86: Life expectancy of human beings has dramatically changed over the years.

P: However, the twentieth century and certainly the twenty-first century has demonstrated the
utility of biological knowledge in furthering human welfare, be it in health sector or
agriculture.

Q: The discovery of antibiotics, and synthetic plant-derived drugs, anaesthetics have changed
medical practice on one hand and human health on the other hand.

R: Applications of physics and chemistry in our daily life also have a higher visibility than those
of biology.

S: Progress in physics and chemistry proceeded much faster than in biology.

‘The correct sequence should be
(a) QPRS (b) — PRQS
(© RPQS (a) SRPQ
45. S1: People in society need many goods and services in their everyday life including food, clothing,
shelter, transport, ete.
6: The teacher in the local school has the skills required to impart education to the students.

P: Aweaver may have some yarn, some cotton and other instruments required for weaving cloth.

Q: A family farm may own a plot of land, some grains, farming implements, maybe a pair of
bullocks and also the labour services of the family members.

R: Every individual has some amount of the goods and services that one would like to use.

S: In fact, the list of goods and services that any individual needs is so large that no individual in
society, to begin with, has all the things one needs.

The correct sequence should be

(a) PQRS (») —_ RSPQ

(© QPSR (@ — SRQP
PLKI-F-ENG (9-A)

46. $1: Farming is the main production activity in the village.
86: The new ways of farming need less land, but much more capital.
P: These have allowed the farmers to producé more crops from the same amount of land,
Q: Over the years there have been many important changes in the way farming is practised.
R: But in raising production, a great deal of pressure has been put on land and other natural
resources. .
S: This is an important achievement, since land is fixed and scarce.
The correct sequence should be
(a) QPSR (») —-RSPQ
(©) SRPQ (@ — PRSQ
47, S1: Britain was the first country to experience modern industrialization.
86: This gave people a wider choice for ways to spend their earnings and expanded the market for
the sale of goods,
P: This meant that the kingdom had common laws, a single currency and a market that was not
fragmented by local authorities and uneven taxation.
Q: Ithad been politically stable since the seventeenth century, with England, Wales and Scotland
unified under a monarchy.
R: By then a large section of the people received their income in the form of wages and salaries
than in goods.
S: By the end.of the seventeenth century, money was widely used as the medium of exchange.
The correct sequence should be
(@) QPSR ) — PSQR
(©) RSQP (@) — SRQP
48. S1: For several million years, humans lived by hunting wild animals and gathering wild plants.
6: As a result, conditions were favourable for the growth of grasses such as wild barley and
wheat.
P: This led to the development of farming and pastoralism as a way of life.
Q: This change took place because the last ice age came to an end about 13,000 years ago and
with that warmer, wetter conditions prevailed
R: Then, between 10,000 and 4,500 years ago, people in different parts of the world learnt to
domesticate certain plants and animals.
S: The shift from foraging to farming was a major turning point in the human history.
‘The correct sequence should be
(a) QSPR (b) — SPQR
(© PSQR (a) RPSQ
PLKI-F-ENG (10-A)

49. S1: All governments claim eternal consistency and success.

6: Diplomacy offers choices, and those choices must be negotiated with other sovereign actors,

P: Choices involved uncertainty, risk and immediacy; those who must take the choices operate in
the contemporary political milieu.

Q:*And yet the essence of governance is choice

R: Nowhere is this more true than in foreign policy decision-making

S: Some even claim omniscience.

The correct sequence should be

(a) SQPR

(>) QSRP

(© SRPQ

(@) RSPQ

50. Si: Buddhism continued to spread into many lands of Asia during the period of 5" and
6" century.

S86: He translated several scriptural commentaries into Pali and wrote a work called the
Visuddhimagga, which soon attained the status of a classic work on Theravada doctrine and
meditation.

P: While this can be understood as a part of larger processes of cultural interaction, especially
trade, a key role was played by monks.

Q: We know a little bit about some of them, but there must have been countless men whose
commitment to the Buddhist path gave them the courage and determination to persevere in
the face of the long, hard journey to India and back.

R: Buddhism had made its way to Sri Lanka many centuries earlier, during the time of Ashoka,
and a thriving Buddhist community soon took root.

S: Inthe 5" century, the monk Buddhaghosha travelled to Sri Lanka.

The correct sequence should be

(a) RQPS

(>) QRPS

(©) PQRS

(@) PSRQ

PLKI-F-ENG (11-A)

FILL IN THE BLANKS
Directions : Each of the following sentences in this section has a blank space and four words or group of
words are given after the sentence. Select the most appropriate word or group of words for the blank space
and indicate your response on the Answer Sheet accordingly.
51. On his way to the capital, the minister__| 56. The chairperson said that the group was
the eminent social worker at his residence. of time,
(@) called on (@) running out
(b) called (») running
(© calling for (© running with
(@) call off (@) runout
52, The fire brigade fought for four hours tol 57 i¢ ; an angel, I would solve the
______ the fire in the building. iutiaeia cate
\oeae va (a) am
() - put out ‘ieee
© puton see
Side cits (@ have
53, Ravi has proved that he can on his
rs Garam oruadliin mates 58. Where there is a , there is a way
(@) carry through cA:
(b) carry out re
© carry om
(@) carry off mena ity
54. It is best to politics when in the | 59. The police could not establish how the
classroom. accident 4
(a) keep out (a) came off
(b) keep on (b) came about
(©) keep off (©) came on
{0 keeping (d) came out
55. It shows that she has__ many years
psesay 60. 1 my old friend after twenty years.
(ak, poste (a) ran into
(b) put out beeen
Riles © runin
(@ _ puton Ca) 4 oan
PLKI-F-ENG (12-A)

SYNONYMS
Directions : Each item int thi8 section consists of a sentence with an underlined word followed by four
words/group of words. Select the option that is nearest in meaning to the underlined word and mark
‘your response on the Answer Sheet accordingly.
61. All the developments that took place in the | 66. A new show is trying to change the clichéd
20" century have had implications for the depictions of women in animation.
next century. (a) original
(a) consequences (b) hackneyed
() interferences (© crony
(© feedback (@) artificial
(@ planning
67. Not everyone finds a vocation which suits
62. He is such a leader that his actions are one’s aptitude,
contagious. (a) attitude
(@) complicated (b) approach
(b) transmittable (© liking
(© effective (@) occupation
(@ unthinkable
68, Uninterrupted rain had fatigued the
63, The budget incorporated a number of tax commuters from the outskirts to the city and
reforms which included higher taxes for the work suffered.
very rich. (a) excited
(a) excluded (b) refreshed
(b) integrated (©) slowed
(© laid down (@) exhausted
(@)_ removed
69. The leader said, “I am aghast with the
64, His thesis makes all generic statements which developments so far. I will take time to
have already been proved. understand this.”
(a). specific (a) satisfied
(b) crude (b) sad
(© broad (© amused
(@) non-standard (@) horrified
65. The captain produced yet another stellar show | 70- The cause of the accident is yet to be
to make her team enter the semi-finals. ascertained, but police officials suspect the
(ade Geieealedtasey driver of the vehicle allegedly fell asleep.
(),- edipas (a) determined
Pc gehts (b) curtained
tain isda (© thought of,
(@ being known
PLKI-F-ENG (13-A)

ANTONYMS
Directions : Each item in this section consists of sentences with an underlined word followed by four words
or group of words. Select the option that is opposite in meaning to the underlined word and mark your
response on the Answer Sheet accordingly.
71. Early medieval period was not a combination | 76. —'Tempestuous behaviour would not yield much
of urban and rural civilization. It was not a in any place
period of urban decay as claimed by some. (a) relaxed
(@) survival (b) passionate
(b) waste away (© intense
(© decomposition ees
(@ spoil
77. Wooing everyone over an issue for support
72. He speaks eloquently and can pull crowds. Will wot dere tataali poll
(a) confusingly (a) discouraging
(b) expressively (b) encouraging
(©) powerfully (© pursuing
(@) fluently (@ persuading
78. Everyone has to fight the inertia in the | 78. The highest award was bestowed upon her for
system, her yeoman service.
(a) sluggishness (a) conferred
(b)  indolence () withdrawn
(© activity (©) imparted
(d) torpor (a) imbibed
74, There is a need to promote philanthropy in| 79, One feels elated when someone praises one’s
education. as
(a) charity (0) $6éts good
(b) benevolence aes
)
(© nastiness @icaaeeesd
(@) _likeliness
(@ sober
75. What we lack in the current times is
pea te 80. All business activities need not result in
compassion. profit-making. There is a need to be
(a) empathy charitable.
(b) carefulness (a) lenient
(©) indifference oe
(©) unforeseen
(@) hardship
(@) gracious
PLKL-F-ENG (14-a)

PARTS OF SPEECH
Directions : Each of the following sentences has a word or phrase underlined. Read the sentences carefully
and find which part of speech the underlined word belongs to. Indicate your response on the Answer Sheet
accordingly.
81. He has been working in the Department of | 86. When he reached the department, the officials
Foreign Affairs since 2002 had left for the meeting.
(@) Adverb (a) Past perfect verb
(b) Adjective (b) Past tense
(©) Intensifier (©) Dependent clause
(@ Noun (@) Independent clause
82, The man in dark blue is the one who made us | 87. He has offered her another chance.
win the match. (a) _Intransitive verb
(a) Relative clause (b) Past tense
(>) _Interrogative pronoun (©) Backes tents
(©) Relative pronoun (a) Transitive verb
(a) Affirmative
88. The building is very ancient.
83. The most beautiful actor of the industry was Gare rnoellive oat
awarded today. (b) _Intransitive verb
Ps aahesve (©) Phrasal verb
(&) Numeral (@) Auxiliary verb
(©) Adverb
eae 89. Hurrah! What a scintillating beauty the
landscape is !
84. “What is the latest news ?” asked the Captain (@Ctinjucsons
(a) Relative pronoun (b) Adjective
(b) Adjective (©) Adverb
(©) Adverb (a) _Interjeetion
(a) Adjectival clause
90. Ravi was declared as the winner in the tie
85. Noticing the change in the behaviour of the because he had hit the most number of fours
officer, the cadets returned to their position. and sixes
(a) Participle (a) Conjunetion
(b) Present continuous (b) _Interjection
(©) Noun phrase (©) Adverb
(a) Noun (@) Cause
PLKL-F-ENG (18-A) :

SPELLING MISTAKES
Directions : In this section a word is spelt in four different ways. Identify the one which is correct. Choose
the correct response (a), (b), (c) or (d) and indicate on the Answer Sheet accordingly.
91. Which one of the following alternatives has | 96. Which one of the following alternatives has
the correct spelling ? the correct spelling ?
(a) Continuum (a) Neuphrology
(6) Continuem (b) Nephrology
(© Contuneim (©) Neprology
(@)  Continueiam (@) _Neaprology
92. Which one of the following alternatives has | 97. Which one of the following alternatives has
the correct spelling ? the correct spelling ?
(a) Stretegy (a) Psudonym
(b)  Stretagy (6) Pseudonym
(©) Stratagy (©) Pseudanym
(@) Strategy (@) Seeudonym
93. Which one of the following alternatives has | 98. Which one of the following alternatives has
the correct spelling ? the correct spelling ?
(a) Commisionor (a) Pnumonia
(>) Commisioner ()  Neumonia
(©) Commissioner (©) Pneumonia
(4) Comissioner @ ~~ Numania
94. Which one of the following alternatives has | 99. Which one of the following alternatives has
the correct spelling ? the correct spelling ?
(a) Vacum (a) Resilient
(6) Vacuum (b)  Resilint
(© Vacuem (© Risilient
(@) Vacam (@)  Realisent
95. Which one of the following alternatives has | 100. Which one of the following alternatives has
the correct spelling ? the correct spelling ?
(a) _ Psephology (a) Suplementary
(b)  Psefoloagy (b) Supplementary
(©) Sephology (©) Supplementery
(@) _Psyphology (@) Supplemantory
PLKI-F-ENG (16-A)

‘TRANSFORMATION OF SENTENCES

Directions : In this section two sentences are given and you are required to find the correct sentence which

combines both the sentences. Choose the correct response (a), (), (c) or (d) and indicate on the Answer Sheet

accordingly.

101. Which is the correct combination of the given | 104. Which is the correct combination of the given
‘two sentences ? two simple sentences using ‘If” clause ?
eee Minchi should have worked hard. She would

‘ou can meet him.
have cleared the test
(@) You can meet the officer when he
returned from China on Monday (a) If Minchi had worked hard, she would
(b) You can meet the officer when he will have cleared the test.
return from China on Monday.
() Had not Minchi worked hard, she could
(©) You can meet the officer when he ai SAN
returns from China on Monday Re eee re
(a) The officer will meet you when you (©) If Minchi has worked hard, she would
return from China on Monday. hasipelosnidicuaition

102. Which is the correct combination of the given (@) If Minchi had worked hard, she will
Sbasigae: we have cleared the test
He is hard-working. He is honest too.

(@) He is not only hard-working, but also

honest, 105. Which one of the following is the correct
(b) He is only hard-working and honest. statement combining the two statements
(©) He is hard-working but honest too. using ‘though’ ?
(a) He is not hard-working but also honest. He ida body ping hie lavel base bs ia Hie

103. Which is the correct combination of the given bg ecsmrege
Peer aoe (a) Though he is trying his level best to
Parents have been. waiting since morning. erage “

They want to meet the counsellor. Tn bene eee
(a) The counsellor has been waiting to meet {h), Sita. te; @eyitea hia lowed: Habe: bs weit
pape Sed Neng though he could not succeed.
(b) Parents had been waiting to meet the
counsellor since the morning. (©) ‘Though he has been trying his level best
(©) Parents are waiting to meet the to win, he could not succeed.
counsellor in the morning.
(io aPaicila hale A ead eattiig ica (a) Though he had been trying his level
morning to meet the counsellor. best to win, he could not succeed.
PLKL-F-ENG (7A)

106. Which is the correct combination of the given | 109. Which is the correct combination of the given

two sentences using ‘relative clause’ ? two sentences ?
Gandhiji preached peace. He is an apostle of The teacher entered the classroom. All
peace. students stopped talking.
{at Genet beh: eenaehed: peace san. (a) No sooner did the teacher enter the
bas oe aa classroom than the students stopped
(b) Gandhiji preached peace because he is talking
an apostle of peace.
BP OEE, Sai a (b) As soon as the teacher entered the
Kota nae a ee classroom all students were asked to
an apostle of peace
stop talking.
(@  Gandhiji is an apostle of peace because
he preached peace. (©) All students stopped talking as the
teacher enters the classroom.

107. Which is the correct combination of the given
two sentences ? (No sooner did the students stop talking
Priya reached the station. The bus left before than the teacher entered the classroom.
her.

(a) When Priya reached the station, the bus z

kat 110. Which one of the following is the correct

coe statement of the combination of the two
(b) When Priya had reached the station, sentenncoa'gived balowientau iibacoenle

spetas already lott Kavya is interested in reading books. Her
(©) Priya reached the station, when the bus sister shows interest in outdoor games.

already left.

(a) Kavya is interested in reading books

pea aire ve bed reece fe aation, whereas her sister's interest is outdoor

the bus had already left.

games.

108. Which is the correct combination of the given 7) Buy: in: tabs dais caches
ener whereas her sister is not interested in
He is too tired. He could not stand. ie
(a) He is so tired that he could scarcely

dia (©) Kavya is interested in reading whereas
her sister’s interest is outdoor games.
(b) Hes too tired and cannot stand.
(c) - He will not stand and he is very tired. (d) Kavya is interested in reading books
(d) He is so tired that he could not be Mimi Eks. mahtetooe or
standing. waka
PLKI-F-ENG (18-A)

REPORTED SPEECH
Directions : In this section direct speech sentences are given and you are required to find the correct
indirect speech sentence of the same. Choose the correct response (a), (b), (c) or (d) and indicate on the
Answer Sheet accordingly.
111. Rahul said to his teacher, “Madam, what is|114. Navanitha said to her friends, “What a
the way to solve the question ?” scintillating beauty itis !”
MmelireS caka: jee seeped (a) Navanitha told to her friends that it was
solve the question was. 2 sucess pecs
(b) Rahul told his teacher what was the way
ta sollte qucklisng () Navanitha exclaimed to her friends
what a scintillating beauty it was.
(©) Rahul asked to his teacher what the way ol i
was to solve the question. (© Navanitha asked her friends whether it
(a) Rahul told his teacher what the way was was a scintillating beauty.
to solve the question.
Bees (@ _Navanitha exclaimed to her friends that
112. He said to his friend, “Could you please close it was a scintillating beauty.
the door ?”
(a) He requested his friend to close the
door.
(b) He requested his friend to please close
shite 115. The Captain said to the soldiers, “March
forward and aim at the peak of the hill today.”
(©) He ordered his friend to close the
door. (a) The Captain requested the soldiers to
(@) He wanted his friend to close the door sagt Da Ss So gg oh ne a
‘tir htt the hill that day.
118. Raj said to Sheela, “The Sun rises in the east.” (b) The Captain ordered the soldiers to
(a) _ Raj told Sheela that the Sun rose in the ee ee
the hill today.
east.
(b) Raj told Sheela that the Sun rises in the (©) The Captain ordered the soldiers to
east. march forward and aim at the peak of
(c) Raj asked Sheela that the Sun rises in the hill that day.
aks 5 (@) The Captain told the soldiers that they
(@) Raj said to Sheela that the Sun has should march forward and aim at the
arisen in the east. peak of the hill that day.
PLKI-F-ENG (19-A)

116. “Where were you last evening ?” said the lady|119. The villagé chief said to the villagers, “All of
to her maid. us need to adopt new regulations. We will
(a) The lady asked her maid where she had protect our Earth forever.”

been the previous evening,
(a) The village chief ordered the villagers

() The lady asked her maid where she had
phasis lat evening. that all of them needed to adopt new

(©) The lady asked her maid where had she he a AUR epee paces Eee
been the evening before. Earth forever.

SU ea aps oe ol aaa (b) The village chief told the villagers that
Derngnetion a erenne all of them need to adopt new

117. “Those who sowed the seeds lait season will regulations and they will protect their
reap the harvest this season,” said the leader Raith forever:
to her followers.

(a) The leader said to her followers that (©) The village chief wanted the villagers
those who sowed the seeds the previous needed to adopt new regulations and
season would reap the harvest that ‘ley proud pepeae arts FO ara
season.

(hin POGbIbe Wit banked ie tollowece that (The village chief told the villagers that
those who have sown the seeds the all of them needed to adopt new
previous season would reap the harvest regulations and they would protect their
Eepeanan. Earth forever.

(©) The leader addressed her followers that
those who had sown the seeds the
previous season would reap the harvest
that season.

(@ The leader advised her followers that|120- The grandfather said to the baby, “May you
acai’ theinseds tliepredtous live long with all good things of life.”
season would reap the harvest this
ties (a) The grandfather blessed to the baby

with Iong life and all good things of life.

118. He said to his manager, “Could you please
pass the bill this week 2” (b) The grandfather asked the baby that she
(a) He told his manager that bill to be Would. live long with all good things of

passed. life.

eee paper ieee suapager: to pase) the: (©) The grandfather wanted the baby to live
bill that week.

long with all good things of life.

(©) He ordered his manager to pass the bill
that week. (4) The grandfather blessed the baby that

(d) He requested his manager to pass the she would live long with all good things
bill this week. of life.

PLKI-F-ENG (20-A)

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
PLKI-F-ENG (21-A)

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
PLKI-F-ENG (22-A)

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
PLKI-F-ENG (23-A)

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
PLKI-F-ENG (24-A)