GMEERON SERBACES (WAN) EXAI! 2022 GVP-B-ELX
ELECTRONICS AND TELECOMMUNICATION
ENGINEERING
Paper - II
Time Allowed : Three Hours [Maximum Marks : 300
2 7
Question Paper Specific Instructions
Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting
questions :
There are EIGHT questions divided in TWO sections.
Candidate has to attempt FIVE questions in all.
Questions No. 1 and 5 are compulsory and out of the remaining, any THREE are to be
attempted choosing at least ONE question from each section.
The number of marks carried by a question [part is indicated against it.
Wherever any assumptions are made for answering a question, they must be clearly
indicated.
Diagrams | figures, wherever required, shall be drawn in the space provided for answering
the question itself.
Unless otherwise mentioned, symbols and notations have their usual standard meanings.
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck off, attempt of a
question shall be counted even if attempted partly.
Any page or portion of the page left blank in the Question-cum-Answer (QCA) Booklet must
be clearly struck off.
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only.
pian a a
:

‘ SECTION A
Ql. (a) “An Ahalog signal banid limited to 3-3 kHz is sampled above Nyquist rate
to have a guard band of 1-4 kHz. The samples are quantized into
4 levels. The quantization levels Q,, Qz, Q3 and Qy are assumed to be
independent and occur with probabilities P, = 3 Pps i, fpeP.s fa
Determine the information rate of the source. 10
(b) A feedback control system is given by the following figure :
+ Bis) K@+
R@)—4(S2) — Cs)
aie (s+ 2)(s+3)(s+4) i
1
Find the value of K’ so that there is 10% error in the steady state. 10
© By’ taking suitable examples, differentiate between concurrency and
parallelism in the context of processes in operating systems. 10
>
(@ Given magnetic field H = =42¥ a+ 4 @,A/m in free space, evaluate
z
~~
f H.. dL, where the anticlockwise closed path for the integration is
L
the boundary defining the closed surface 2m <x<3m,3m<y<6m
andz+3 m. 10
(e) What is the importance of oxidation in VLSI technology ? Which types of
oxidation are used to grow gate oxide and field oxide in the fabrication of
NMOS transistor ? Justify your answer. 10
(© Two stations have LOS communication link with half-wave antenna at
"200 km distance. If the transmitter transmits 10 kW power at 300 MHz,
what is the maximum power received ? The directivity gain of each
antenna is 16. 10
2

2 (a) A double sideband-suppressed carrier (DSB-SC) modulated signal with
message bandwidth of 5 kHz and carrier frequency of 250 kHz is
transmitted over a noisy channel. The power spectral density (PSD) of
the channel noise is as shown below :

t Sy
H
110-8 W/Hz
co se We
:
H
a ee een cite
= 500 0 500 pees sits)
Coherent receiver is used for the demodulation.
(Obtain and plot the PSD of the noise at the receiver output. R
Gi) Assuming that the average power of the modulated wave is
10 Watts, calculate the output signal-to-noise ratio of the
receiver. 8
() A feedback control system is shown in the following figure. The
controller and process transfer functions are given as :
s+40
Gus) =K and Gis) = *40-
and the feedback transfer function is H(s) = —1
(s + 20)
Rs) E,(s) [Controller ive)
@ Determine the limiting value of the gain ‘K’ for a stable system. 8
(ii) For the gain that results in marginal stability, determine the
magnitude of the imaginary roots. 4
(iii) Reduce the gain to half the magnitude of the marginal value and
determine the relative stability of the system by shifting the axis
and using the Routh-Hurwitz criterion. 8
s

(©) Consider a simple system running a single process. The size of physical
frames and logical pages is 16 bytes. The RAM can hold 3 physical
frames. The virtual addresses of the process are 6 bits in size. The
program generates the following 20 virtual address references as it runs
on the CPU : 0, 1, 20, 2, 20, 21, 32, 31, 0, 60, 0, 0, 16, 1, 17, 18, 32, 31, 0,

61. Note that the 6-bit addresses are shown in decimal here and assume
that the physical frames in RAM are initially empty and do not map to
any logical page.
() Translate the virtual addresses above to logical page numbers
referenced by the process. Assume pages are numbered starting
from 0, 1, 2, .... 10
(i) Using First In First Out (FIFO) page replacement algorithm,
calculate the number of page faults generated by the accesses
above. 5
(iii) Using Least Recently Used (LRU) page replacement algorithm,
calculate the number of page faults generated by the accesses
above. 5
Q3. (a) In digital audio system, the analog audio signal with peak-to-peak
voltage ‘V,,’ is sampled and uniformly quantized into L levels.
() Show that the ratio of peak signal power to peak quantization
noise power | 2 = 10
Ng
peak
(ii) If the samples are encoded with PCM, determine the bit rate in
bits ner‘eecond for (=) = 84 dB, The eampling frequency is
‘4 J peak
44-1 kilo samples per second. 10
‘

(b) The system shown in the following figure is a two input-two output
C.(8)
system. Derive the expressions for 51, where i and j represent the
@
i
number of inputs and number of outputs respectively in the system. 20
SC
=
| 4
% ey) C
(©) Let ’ be the clock rate of a digital computer, ‘N’ be the number of
machine instructions to be executed in a program on the digital
computer, ‘p’ be the number of processor cycles needed for the
instruction decode and execution, ‘m’ be the number of memory
references needed and ‘K’ be the ratio between memory cycle and
processor cycle. Derive the expression for CPU time needed to
execute the program assuming single instruction type in the
program. 15
(i) A given application written in the same programming language
runs 12 seconds on a processor. After release of a new compiler
for the same language, it requires only 0:5 as many instructions
as the old compiler, but it increases the Cycles Per Instruction
(CPD by 1-2. How fast can we expect the application to run using
this compiler ? 5
5

Q4. (a) Binary data at a bit rate of 104 bits/second is to be transmitted using
binary FSK.
(i) Ifthe FSK signal is transmitted over binary symmetrical channel
with noise spectral density Ny = 2 x 10-5 Watts/Hz, determine
the channel capacity required for error free transmission. The
average power of the FSK modulated signal is 1 Watt and assume
that binary 1 and binary 0 are equiprobable. 8
(ii) — Draw the block diagram and show the non-coherent demodulation
of FSK. What should be the minimum separation between the two
carrier frequencies representing binary 1 and binary 0 ?
Determine the bandwidth of the bandpass filters used in the
receiver system. 12
(b) A system is represented in state variable form as
* =Ax+Bu
y=Cx+Du,
where
OT 0
A= » Bs i
ado) =K 1
C=[1 0] and D=(0).
(i) Determine the characteristic equation. 5
(ii) Sketch the root locus of the system. 10
(iii) Test the stability of the system. 5
(c) Write a code or pseudocode (in any standard programming language) to
check whether or not there exist two elements in a given array X[ ]
whose sum is exactly ‘S’. Consider that array X[ ] has ‘N’ numbers and
‘Sis another number. Also write the comments for the lines in your code
or pseudocode. 20
‘

SECTION B Hote)
Q5. (a) The carrier signal c(t) = 8 cos (2n x 108 t) is frequency modulated by a
modulating signal m(t) = 5 cos (2000 nt) + 6 cos (3000'nt). The frequency
sensitivity of the modulator is 10° Hz/volt. Obtain the time domain
expression for the FM wave and calculate the maximum frequency
deviation, modulation index, transmission bandwidth (using Carson’s
rule) and average power in the FM wave. 10
(b) Prove that the Z-transform of a sampled unit ramp’ signal is given by
F@)=—™ 10
(1)
(©) Consider the following code segment in a function of a process :
int *y = (int *) malloc (20 « sizeof (int));
When this function is invoked and executed :
(i) Where is the memory for the variable ‘y’ allocated within the
memory image (heap/stack) of the process and why ? 5
(ii) Where is the memory for the 20 integer variables allocated within
the memory image (heap/stack) of the process and why ? 5
(d) A half-wave dipole situated with its center at the origin’ in’ free space
radiates a time averaged power of 600 Watts at a frequency of 300 MHz.
A receiving half-wave dipole antenna is placed at (300 m, 90°, 40°). It is
oriented so that its axis is parallel to that of the transmitting antenna.
Determine the available power at the receiving antenna. The directivity
of half-wave dipole is 2:15 dB. 10
*

(e) What is the advantage of using a PLA over ROM in the realization of a
combinational function ? Realize the following Boolean function ‘F of
three variables by storing appropriate values and setting proper inputs
to a cascade of 2-input look-up tables (ROM) with only one bit output as
shown below : 10

F(A,B,C)=5(0, 1,3, 5, 6,7)
2-input LUT/ROM
Al
2-input LUT/ROM
AO MSB
F

2-input LUT/ROM_ LSB
BL
BO

() _ A'TCP segment consisting of 1500 bits of data and 160 bits of header is
sent to the IP layer, which appends another 160 bits of header. This is
then transmitted through two networks, each of which uses a 24-bit
packet header. The destination network has a maximum packet size of
800 bits. How many bits, including headers, are delivered to the network
layer protocol at the destination ? 10

Q6. (a) A 100 MHz uniform plane wave is propagating in a lossless medium in
positive z-direction. The medium has ¢, = 9 and p, = 4.
() Determine the propagation constant, wavelength and phase
velocity of the wave. 8
(ii) Assuming electric field in x-direction and magnetic field in
y-direction, obtain expressions for Poynting vector and average
power of the wave. What will be the average power if
E, =400 V/m? 12
*o
.

(b) Write an 8085 program to generate an approximate digital clock by
utilizing the delays associated with different instructions. Assume that
the 8085 microprocessor is operating at a clock frequency of 3 MHz and
a display routine is available to display the binary contents of memory
locations 2700H, 2701H and 2702H corresponding to hours, minutes and
seconds of a digital clock respectively. 20

(©) Acontinuous 12 km long optical fiber link has a loss of 1-5 dB/km.

(i) What is the minimum optical power level that must be launched
into the fiber to maintain an optical power level of 0-3 1W at the
receiving end ? 10

(i) What will be the input power required, if the fiber link is
increased by 100% and fiber loss is reduced to 1 dB/km ? 10

Q7. (a) A certain lossless transmission line is 1-6 m long and has characteristic
resistance Ry = 500 Q. The line is operating in air and frequency of
operation is 500 MHz.

() The line is terminated with a short circuit. It is observed that the
maximum voltage at any point on the line is 11:56 volts. What
will be the magnitude of input voltage ? Determine the current
through the short circuit. 10

(ii) The short circuit is replaced by a resistance load of 200 Q. The
input voltage is varied so that 100 Watts of power is delivered to
the load. Find the reflection coefficient, voltage standing wave
ratio and power in the incident wave. 10

9

(6). Realize a ‘sum’ output of a full adder by using appropriate number of
cireuit blocks shown below and inverters. 20
Sum = (A ® B) ®C;,)
INI
de bt sabes 20 Se SENG
F 1
' H
‘
1 '
INO -—+ + IN3
' '
' '
a
' ee eee See |
t
ie od IN4 \
(Circuit Block)
IN2
our
The circuit block has six inputs INO, IN1, ... IN5 and one output ‘OUT.
(© A telephone network consists of two end offices and one
intermediate switch with a 1 MHz full duplex trunk between each
end office and the intermediate switch. The average telephone is
used to make four calls per 8 hour work day, with a mean call
duration of six minutes. Ten percent of the calls are long distance.
What is the maximum number of telephones an end office can
support ? 10
(i) Ina pure ALOHA system, the channel bit rate is 2400 bits/second.
Each terminal transmits a 100 bits message every minute.
Determine the maximum number of terminals that can use the
channel. 10
2

Q8. ‘(a) An air-filled rectangular waveguide is to be constructed for single mode
operation at 15 GHz. The design condition is that the frequency is
20 percent higher than the cut-off frequency for the fundamental mode,
while being 20 percent lower than the cut-off frequency for the next
higher order mode.
(i) Determine the guide dimensions a and b. 10
(ii) Find the propagation constant, wavelength and phase velocity for
the guided mode. 10
(b) (i) Design a block level architecture of a seven coefficient FIR filter
by using appropriate number of multipliers, adders and registers.
Assume that all the input operands are available in 8 bit, 2’s
complement fixed point representation. The architecture should
give one output per clock cycle. 12
(ii) Identify the different blocks required, if the FIR filter is to be
realized by using a single multiplier and an adder. Justify your
answer. 8
(©) A QPSK signal is transmitted by satellite. Raised-cosine filtering is
used, for which the roll-off factor is 0-2 and a BER of 10-$ is required.
For the satellite downlink, the losses amount to 200 dB, the receiving
earth station G/T ratio is 32 dBK~!, and the transponder bandwidth is
36 MHz. Calculate
(i) the maximum bit rate that can be accommodated. 10
(ii) the required equivalent isotropic radiated power. 10
E,
Assume that (@] ratio for 10-5 BER is 10 dB.
0
“

I 6 a. Sar
Ra ps aR ae te es aie Pea ee
i ee aS ie: - gai? SMe ye
one raat cc UM Sn 2 |
Pee Gt ee ea ae es ee
Fa et athe ures Karten Siar ft + deity = 3) ohh nis bea gtiadh ot EL)
te Pron SEF Aca Tannve Se Se ee oe ee oe |
ce, eee ¥ msg es Aa ae
Bae me gga git | RS og ae
a eee oe ke
aa SERN eo aa NCS, aie ems pri
Ro) Sig ae i he a ae ee
ee ee ce ea,
OO itt cs 7 Me ng. ee
eee ayihemtaciir is ae ag ae Nao eee
ie eee oe ee Se oie ee
ie i a ec Re he
a Olea ar ae
wear: ae ao ie ee ae ee ES “