(GISF AC (EXE) LDCE2010 , GAIP-B-EPC
Pera, UREA Bi ateleut
ESSAY, PRECIS WRITING AND COMPREHENSION
Patter ara: a a2 siirea FE: 100
Time Allowed : Two Hours Maximum Marks : 100
wea were favre seat

Lapal a see Bt & weet Pretoria wees sya wt ara Saray Te |

ae wer siftart & |

MeH BOM 1 sitet site feet Gat srait Fo #1

Mey wer Lar sR Fe Mig ATH (aba aT Ket) F eran ara aaiee, Freer sect weber F Pea rar
8 afte ar aren ar are sorte NeT-ae-set Ghar & aS I falee carr 9 fear aT erie | wif
sare o rtttrs array fasett area a fered me Tere We ate See TAT rePh /

SH HEU 2, 3 a 4 sist ore F wt F |

WRT EN 2, 3 wa Aw se ath H re art ae |

at 3 wen & anit ants & ao aaa Ferea aaTaeTe 2 |

“4 wets mrea/urr a oaftraran sian seas ere? Fare are & 1

set af et HF arog—athon fate 8, Serer ETT AT TARA Bt

Wea aE- TER GMT FTA BS ME TS aT GS a art ah aor B are Bar TART |

ry Peat oft sere HF a9 Wirre wee 7 Fife |

Question Paper Specific Instructions

Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting questions.

All questions are compulsory.

Question No. 1 is printed both in English and in Hindi.
Answer to Question No. 1 should be written in medium (English or Hindi) as authorized in the
Admission Certificate and this medium must be stated clearly on the cover of the QCA Booklet in
the space provided. No marks will be given for answers written in medium other than the
authorized one.

Questions No. 2, 3 and 4 are printed in English only.

Answer to Questions No. 2, 3 and 4 must be written in English only.

All parts/sub-parts of a question shall be written together.

‘The number of marks carried by a question |part is indicated against it.

Word limit in questions, wherever specified, should be adhered to.

Any page or portion of the page left blank in the QCA Booklet must be clearly struck off.

You must not disclose your identity in any of your answers.

GAIP-B-EPC Fa

b
Qi. Frerferfad faeat 3a fret car a cer 500 wedi H Frate Ferien: '
Write an essay in about 500 words on any one of the following kj
topics: (40) .
(a) Faq fay sefouereen area H creer ai 2
Cashless economy is not practicable in India
(b) 0 amar wees F gran aati A ten a serarerer
Role and responsibilities of security forces in disaster management
(©) aeft fafaa aiepiee a anita faced at ge: oferta aad # arta
artes a fire
Role of Indian Diaspora in redefining its diverse cultural and literary
heritage
(a) Fo afer (Me-Too Movement) — wa fave arfarél weet i
Me-Too Movement — A bold feminist initiative
=
(eo) Peer aaa, =a & fre cara & ee & bs
Justice delayed is justice denied
Q2. Write a précis of the following passage by reducing it to one-third of
its length. Failure to adhere to the word limit may result in deduction
of marks. Do not suggest any title. The précis must be written in the
space provided for it : (20)
The unification of the world is in process though it is struggling fa
against many difficulties. Even as individuals are bound by the laws of the
nation to which they belong, nation states should be bound by international
law. Just as there are individuals who break the law, there are nations who
break the law and commit agression. The law of nations should be based on the
federation of free states,
GAIP-B-EPC 2

A society becomes cohesive if its members share large hopes, ideals
and desires. If the world is to become a community, all the peoples should share
common ideals and purposes even though they are separated by barriers,
physical and psychological. All history is the story of remarkable individuals
dramatically engaged in mastering the hostile environment. A few in every
nation, in every part of the world, amid the uproar of nations and empires hear
the voice of the future, the gentle stirring of life and hope. It is not one nation
or one man. It is a new spirit that is awakened, revived and nourished by
seemingly helpless but convinced and committed solitary individuals, to adapt
the words of Albert Camus, whose deeds and works negate frontiers and
breathe the oneness of humanity. As the result of their sufferings and
sacrifices, the vision of the threatened truth that each one of us belongs to the
whole and should build for all becomes manifest. None of the differences which
separate the governments of the world is as important as their membership in
the family of nations. The central problem is the development of loyalty to the
world community. The greatest era of human history on earth is within reach of
all mankind. To achieve this ideal, we have to discover our moral strength,
define our purposes, and direct our energies.

In facing this task, we come up against the crudest implications of
history, that war is the maker of nations. Though, in previous epochs we waged
wars which brought misery, destruction and ruin in their wake, we pointed out
that defensive wars were better than shameful submission to barbaric
aggressors who wished to achieve greatness and power by dominating the
whole world. The two wars, the most ghastly in history, were waged by men of
our generation. The leaders of the civilization who brought about these wars, in
their moments of cool reflection, hate themselves for their responsibility. The
world was full of oppressions and cruelties, stupidities and delusions and we
thought we would remove them by resorting to violence. The nations today feel
a genuine sense of guilt and shame. There is a widespread consciousness of the
folly and wickedness in which most people and governments are involved. In
spite of our earnest desire to get rid of wars, the fear of them, the baseness and

GAIP-B-EPC 3

savagery which that fear engenders are there raising the question, whether
there is any hope for this perverted and criminal generation. Is there any hope
that man can civilize himself ? History is a dreadful warning. A few individuals
suffer from mental derangements and some nations pass through nervous
breakdowns resulting in excitement, violence and hatred.

‘The great powers are engaged in a struggle to capture the souls of the
emerging peoples who have been released from colonial domination. These
nations are in a state of inner turmoil. One conflict leads to another. Irrational
feeling, racial hatred, primitive tribalism, poverty, hunger, suffering, intrigues,
plots and counter-plots make them a seething mass, mysterious and
unpredictable. The new nations will have no peace, for the great powers are
fighting on the soil of small emerging nations. (600 words)

Q3. Read the following passage and write short and precise answers to
the questions that follow, in your own words: (4x5=20)
Spring is the time to go and look at our countryside. I don't mean the
false spring of Basant day though, according to an old saying, with the arrival
of Basant, the cold weather takes wings and flies away. For here up north
where the cold is real and the winds blow in earnest, the festival of spring with
all its bright yellow turbans and gay mustard coloured dupattas can make you
shiver and seek the warmth and comfort of the fireside at home.
I remember the 5th of February this year when a steady north wind
brought down a taste of the high Himalayas. Looking windward, we caught a
glimpse of snow-covered peaks beyond a gap in the wintry blue of the foothills.
‘There was no yellow in the fields beyond the new township, the infant wheat
plants were full of a dull green colour, the gram was no more than an untidy
eruption clinging to the hard surface of the earth. There was perhaps a sense of
vigour in the air, a feeling that a tremendous effort was somewhere taking
place, and as I walked through the fields I was enveloped by a strong wintry
GAIP-B-EPC 4

aroma — a glorious health-giving mixture of smells which rose from brown
grass, young green fields, the plants of mustard, cow dung cakes baking dry in
the sun and the smoke of village fires. But the gaiety, the joy and abandon of
fulfilment had yet to come.

And they have come, now that March has brought the real spring to
us. The wheat is now waist-high and the bearded ears heavy with the burden of
fat grains which sway with a drunken rhythm as a light breeze touches them. A
gentle ripple starts at one end of the field and goes whispering all the way to
the other side. The fields are a bright rich green, the sort of green Gauguin
liked to lay on his canvas straight from the tube. The gram plants are a deeper
and duller green but they are dotted with little pink and mauve flowers. The
sarson is in full bloom and as you pass by, the gaiety of the yellow flowers
shining in the morning sun takes possession of you. You stop and inhale the
pungent flavour of the air at this spot. The fields are hedged off with dry thorn
bushes and men and cattle walk along narrow dust-tracks that wind their
picturesque way from one village to another.

How many of you who live in towns and make plans and blueprints,
and talk of the rural wealth of India and the uplift of villagers, have seen and
felt the overpowering beauty of our countryside in spring ? It is only when you
begin to feel a constriction in your throat and your eyes begin to smart that you
will know how important rural India is spiritually even more than materially.
Answer the following questions in your own words :

(a) Describe the weather on Basant day as given in the passage.

(b) What smells does the author describe while walking through the fields
and where were they coming from ?

(c) Describe the colours of various crops one sees in the month of March.

(a) What message does the author convey to the people living in towns ?

(e) Explain the statement “A gentle ripple starts at one end of the field and
goes whispering all the way to the other side”,

GAIP-B-EPC 5

Q4. Read the following passage and write short and precise answers to the -
questions that follow, in your own words : (4x5=20)

The family, after all, is the bedrock of the Indian social unit. We
Indians are as self-seeking as anyone else, but we are not individualists in the
Western mode : India is not hospitable terrain for ‘atomic man’, since India is
not a society in which atomized individuals can accomplish very much. To get ,
anything done in India we require other people — allies who see their interests
as ours. Such allies are most readily found within the cocoon of a family unit,
which generates our most vital support, practical, material and psychological,
as well as the most important of our social duties and obligations.

But we define family more liberally than the rest of the world. We are,
after all, the only country in the world where even the taxman recognizes the
extended joint family spanning several generations and several branches of the
family tree, living together in an arrangement legally known as the ‘Hindu
Undivided Family’. India is not a welfare state in that the government provides
little to our unfortunates, but it is a welfare society in which people constantly
help each other out, provided they feel a connection that justifies their help.

Belonging to the family carries with it a complex web of entitlements
and obligations, not least monetary. Our culture, with some exceptions, treats
family income as commonly accessible, family expenditure as commonly
undertaken, family meals as meant to be shared.

Despite the socialist rhetoric of our political class since independence,
we are a society unfit for socialism. Very few Indians have a broader sense of
community than that circumscribed by ties of blood, caste affiliation or village.

We take care of those we consider near and dear and remain largely indifferent
to the rest.
GAIP-B-EPC 6

A
,
:
i] Answer the following questions in your own words :
(a) What is the importance of family as an Indian social unit ?
(b) What do you understand by ‘Hindu Undivided Family’ ?
(c) Why is it better to define India as a ‘Welfare Society’?
; (@) Why is India not a fertile ground for socialism ?
(e) Make sentences with the following words used in the passage to bring
out their meaning :
‘ (bedrock
(i) terrain
y
(iv) rhetoric
GAIP-B-EPC 7

J - . : > ' ret ; -
4 - ate A : — 3 7 -
; Le ell) (epee ae tel
oe AL - . ; . :
a
. s ‘ - - :