LEBASSEXAO22 Pater DETACHABLE
GENERAL STUDIES .
Time Allowed : Three Hours Maximum Marks : 100
QUESTION PAPER SPECIFIC INSTRUCTIONS
Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting questions.
There are FOUR questions and all are to be attempted.
Candidates should attempt questions/parts as per the instructions given in the questions.
The number of marks carried by a question/part is indicated against it.
‘Candidates are required to write clear, legible and concise answers and to adhere to word limits,
wherever indicated. Failure to adhere to word limits may be penalized. The answers must be
written within the space provided in the Question-cum-Answer Booklet.
Any page or portion of the page left blank in the Question-cum-Answer Booklet must be clearly
struck off.
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only.
1 GVP-Y-GKL

1. Answer all the following (in not more than '200.‘words each) : 5x5=25

1(a) Discuss the significant advances made in the field of science of astronomy,
mathematics and medicine during the Gupta period.

1.(b) Assess the cultural and artistic achievements of the Vijayanagar empire.

1.(c) Discuss the contribution of Sufis to Indian society and culture.

1.(@) Evaluate the role of Indian National Army (INA) in the freedom struggle of India.

1.(€) _ “Non-cooperation Movement and the Civil Disobedience Movement mark a strategic
shift in the freedom struggle”. Discuss.

2. Answer alll of the following (in not more than 200 words each) : 5x5=25

24a) Why are the farmers of India still haunted by recurrence of drought and flood despite
river valley planning ?

2.(b) How does conservation of biodiversity, especially in the humid tropics, assure
sustenance of livelihood of the people below the poverty line ?

2c) Enumerate the factors responsible for high frequency and magnitude of landslide in
the mountain ecosystem.

2.(d) Assess the prospect of food processing industry with suitable examples from India.

2(¢) What are the pros and cons of infrastructural development in the coastal zone ?

3. ‘Answer all the following (in not more than 200 words each) : 5x5=25

3.(a) What is Non-filers Monitoring System ? Explain how it can increase tax compliance.

3.(b) Explain the difference between subsidies, cash-in-lieu of subsidies and freebies.
Discuss their rationality in eradicating poverty.

3c) Distinguish between Repo Rate and Reverse Repo Rate. Explain their relevance in
the present context of inflation.

3.4) What is Replacement Fertility Rate (RFR)? Does a decline in RFR impact
demographic dividend ?

3.) Explain the concept of venture capital. Discuss the reasons for venture capitalists
favouring software start-ups compared to MSME start-ups.

4. Answer all of the following (in not more than 200 words each) : 5x5=25

4a) “The Preamble is the key to the whole constitution”. Comment.

4.(b) Analyse the powers of the Governor and the causes for their frequent friction with
states.

4(c) Illustrate the challenges and concerns of Parliamentary democracy.

4(d) Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of Collegium System in India.

4.(¢) Critically examine the recent power shift in Pakistan.

GVP-Y-GKL 2