LESNSS EXAM-2022 fear DETACHABLE
GENERAL ENGLISH
QUESTION PAPER SPECIFIC INSTRUCTIONS
Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting questions.
Attempt all the questions.
Marks allotted for a particular question/part are indicated against it.
Word limit of the answers, if specified, should be adhered to.
You must not disclose your identity in any of your answers.
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only.
1 GVP-X-ENG

cP Write an essay on any one of the following topics in about 800 words : 30

(a) Right to Privacy : Intrinsic to Life and Liberty.

(b) Make in India: Big Boost to Industry and Employment.

(©) Significance of Renewable Energy Sources in the context of Global climate
change.

(a) Can Artificial Intelligence Replace Human Agency ?

(e) Women’s participation in Sports is still a challenge in India.

2 Write a précis of the following passage in your own words in about one-third of the
original length : 30
Joy and sadness are experienced by people in all cultures around the world, but how
can we tell when other people are happy or despondent? It turns out that the
expression of many emotions may be universal. Smiling is apparently a universal
sign of friendliness and approval. Baring the teeth in a hostile way, as noted by
Charles Darwin in the nineteenth century, may be a universal sign of anger. As the
originator of the theory of evolution, Darwin believed that the universal recognition
of facial expressions would have survival value. For example, facial expressions
could signal the approach of enemies (or friends) in the absence of language.
Most investigators concur that certain facial expressions suggest the same emotions
in all people. Moreover, people in diverse cultures recognize the emotions
manifested by the facial expressions. In classic research Paul Ekman took
photographs of people exhibiting the emotions of anger, disgust, fear, happiness and
sadness. He then asked people around the world to indicate what emotions were
being depicted in them. Those queried ranged from European college students to
members of the Fore, a tribe that dwells in the New Guinea highlands. All groups,
including the Fore, who had almost no contact with Western culture, agreed on the
portrayed emotions. The Fore also displayed familiar facial expressions when asked
how they would respond if they were the characters in stories that called for basic
emotional responses. Ekman and his colleagues more recently obtained similar
results in a study of ten cultures in which participants were permitted to report that
multiple emotions were shown by facial expressions. The participants generally
agreed on which two emotions were being shown and which emotion was more
intense.

Psychological researchers generally recognize that facial expressions reflect
emotional states. In fact, various emotional states give rise to certain patterns of
electrical activity in the facial muscles and in the brain. The facial-feedback

GVP-X-ENG 2

hypothesis argues, however, that the causal relationship between emotions and facial
expressions can also work in the opposite direction. According to this hypothesis,
signals from the facial muscles are sent back to emotion centres of the brain, and so
a person’s facial expression can influence that person’s emotional state. Consider
Darwin’s words : “The free expression by outward signs of an emotion intensifies it,
On the other hand, the repression, as far as possible, of all outward signs softens our
emotions.” Can smiling give rise to feelings of goodwill, for example, and frowning
to anger ?
Psychological research has given rise to some interesting findings concerning
the facial-feedback hypothesis, causing participants in experiments to smile, for
example, leads them to report more positive feelings and to rate cartoons as being
more humorous. When they are caused to frown, they rate cartoons as being more
aggressive.
What are the possible links between facial expressions and emotion ? One link is
arousal, which is the level of activity or preparedness for activity in an organism.
Intense contraction of facial muscles, such as those used in signifying fear, heightens
arousal. Self-perception of heightened arousal then leads to heightened emotional
activity. Other links may involve changes in brain temperature and the release of
neurotransmitters (substances that transmit nerve impulses). The contraction of facial
muscles both influences the internal emotional state and reflects it. Ekman has found
that the so-called Duchenne smile, which is characterized by “crow’s-feet” wrinkles
around the eyes and a subtle drop in the eye cover fold so that the skin above the
eye moves down slightly toward the eyeball, can lead to pleasant feelings.
Ekman’s observation may be relevant to the British expression “Keep a stiff upper
lip” as a recommendation for handling stress. It might be that a “stiff” lip suppresses
emotional response ~ as long as the lip is not quivering with fear or tension. But
when the emotion that leads to stiffening the lip is more intense, and involves strong
muscle tension, facial feedback may heighten emotional response. (639 words)
3. Write a paragraph in about 200 words on any one of the following : 10
(a) Justice delayed is justice denied.
(b) All's well that ends well.
(c)_ A thing of beauty is a joy forever.
(d) Rituals and scientific thinking.
(©) Is internet a menace to children ?
3 GVP-X-ENG

4. Use the following words, each in a single sentencer:Bring out the meaning clearly
without changing the form of the word. No credit will be given for a vague or
ambiguous sentence : 2x5=10
(a) specious
(b) uncouth
(©) prevaricate
(d)_ chagrin
(©) connoisseur

5. Use the following idioms and phrasal verbs in sentences so as to bring out their

meaning clearly : 2x5=10
(a) swan song
(b) in syne with
(©) to smell a rat

(@)_ go to the dogs

(©) to break the ice

6. Correct the following sentences without changing their meaning, Do not make

unnecessary changes in the original sentences : 1x10=10
(a) The shepherd was tending his sheeps.

(b) I do not understand why he is so angry at me.

(c) What is the time in your watch ?

(@) Look at the correct meaning of the word in the dictionary.

(e) I avoid to go there.

(f) He or his friends has done this.

(g) Mr. Sharma was accused for murder.

(h) He says that he owns a car beside a scooter.

(i) He is a coward fellow.

(j) The children thought of making merry but the rain spoiled there dream.

GVP-X-ENG 4