Cat :
GEOLOGY
Paper - II
Time Allowed : Three Hours Maximum Marks : 200
Question Paper Specific Instructions
Please read each of the following instruetions carefully before attempting
questions :
There are ELEVEN questions divided under SIX sections,
Candidate has to attempt ‘SIX questions in all.
The ONLY question in Section A is compulsory.
Out of the remaining TEN questions, the candidate ‘has to attempt FIVE, choosing ONE
from each of the other Sections B,C, D, Eand¥.
The number of marks carried by a question/part is indicated against it,
Unless otherwise mentioned, symbols, abbreviations and notations have their usual
standard meanings.
Neat sketches are to be drawn to illustrate answers, wherever required. They shall be
drawn in the space provided for answering the ‘question itself.
Wherever required, graphs/tables are to be drawn on the Question-cum-Answer Booklet
itself,
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck Off, attempt of a
question shall be counted even if attempted partly.
Any page or portion of the page left blank in the Question-cum-Answer Booklet must be
clearly struck off.
Answers must beworitten in ‘ENGLISH orily.
HJL-S:GLEY 4

SECTION A
(Compulsory Section)

Ql. Describe the following in brief with diagrams, wherever
necessary ? 5x10=50
(a) Crystal defects 5
(b) Interference phenomenon in Petrological microscope 5
(©) Siderophile and Chalcophile elements 5

(@  Bu-anomaly and its significance 5
(ce) Rapakivi texture 5
()  Congruent and Incongruent melting 5
(g) Paired metamorphic belt 5
(bh) _Hornfelsic texture and its implications 5
(i) Difference between Seismic and Petrological Moho 5
() Kerguelen hotspot 5
HJIS-GLGY 2 t

SECTIONB
Attempt any one question. —
Q2. (a) Write the projection for Cy, and Do, class and give its symmetry and
Hermann-Mauguin symbols. 10
(b) Give an account on structure, chemistry and classification of Garnet
group of minerals. 20
Q3. (a) Write the procedure to obtain conoscopic vision in a Petrological
microscope. How would you determine optic sign of a uniaxial mineral? 10
(b) Give an account on structural classification of silicate minerals with
examples and neat sketches. 10
(©) Explain Twin and Twin laws. Describe different types of twinning in
Feldspars. 10
ven
HJI-S-GLGY 3

SECTION C
Attempt any one question.
@4. (a) Give an account on classification, mineralogy and composition of
meteorites. 10
(b) Define partition coefficient (Kp or D). Discuss Goldschmidt’s Rules that
govern chemical fractionation of elements in silicate melts. 10
(c) Using partition coefficients of compatible and incompatible elements,
explain batch melting in magma evolution. 10
Q5. (a) What do you understand by isotopic fractionation ? Discuss isotopic
evolution of the ocean. How is PDB (Pee Dee Belemnite) useful in the
study of carbon isotopes ? 10
(b) Discuss mass fractionation and bond strength with suitable examples. 10
(©) Write the application of Radio-nuclei in geochronology and discuss
the Sm-Nd system.) -):,.;-1 10
vi 1
i ; |
al ’
HJI-S-GL6Y 4: yaad

SECTION D
Attempt any one question.
Q6. (a) What are petrographic characteristics of Kimberlites ? Add a note on
their tectonic setting. 10
(b) Explain the factors responsible for magma generation. 10
(©) What is an ophiolite suite ? Draw a neat sketch of an ophiolite section.
Label and add a comment on each unit, 10
Q7. (a) What are the conditions to form Layered Igneous Complexes ? Give a
brief account on Bushveld Layered Igneous Complex. 10
(b) Describe eutectic and peritectic crystallisation with reference to
Forsterite — Silica T - X phase diagram. Add a note on corona formation. 10
(©) Explain Lever's rule. Find the composition and relative proportions of
liquid and solid at points A, B and C in a given Albite — Anorthite phase
diagram. 10
wo|_| | [TT TEE TS
von Lf ee
"0 1300 tet et
| Pr | br TT
weet | ET
vont TT
we EET EE
weLt ETT Ete
S00, 10 20 80 40 60 60 70 80 60 i100
——_+ an% An
HuIS-6LBY 51 hie tis

SECTION E
Attempt any one question.
@8. (a) What are metamorphic facies and metamorphic facies series ? Give
suitable examples. 10
(b) Describe Clausius-Clapeyron equation. Add a note on its applications to
metamorphic reactions. Discuss in brief, the prograde regional
metamorphism of pelitic rocks. 20
Q9. (a) _ Discuss in brief, the role of fluids in metamorphism. 10
(b) Give ideas with suitable examples on (i) Retrograde metamorphism, and
(ii) ACF diagram.
Describe with neat sketches the following textures :
Helicitic and Cataclastic. 20
HJLS-GLGY 6 hi

SECTION F
Attempt any one question.
Q10. (a) Explain seismic discontinuities within the Earth with suitable diagram.
Mention the role of Olivine — Spinel phase transition in geodynamic
setting. 10
(b) What are mantle plumes ? Discuss their origin and significance. 20
Q11. (a) Give evidences in support of Continental Drift theory. 10
(b) _ Briefly mention the Gravity and Magnetic anomalies of the ocean floor. 10
(c)  Ilustrate different types of plate boundaries and add a note on their
inter-relationship. 10
HUI-S-GLEY 7