Dinan 8580 Gata eee
GEO-PHYSICS
Paper - II
Question Paper Specific Instructions

Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting
questions :
There are TEN questions divided under TWO sections.
Candidate has to attempt SIX questions in all.
Questions no. 1 and 6 are compulsory.
Out of the remaining EIGHT questions, FOUR questions are to be attempted choosing
TWO from each section.
The number of marks carried by a question | part is indicated against it.
Neat sketches may be drawn to illustrate answers, wherever required. These shall be drawn
in the space provided for answering the question itself.
Unless otherwise mentioned, symbols and notations have their usual standard meanings.
Assume suitable data, if necessary, and indicate the same clearly.
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck off, attempt of a
question shall be counted even if attempted partly.
Any page or portion of the page left blank in the Question-cum-Answer Booklet must be
clearly struck off.
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only.

Physical Constants :

Electron rest mass, m, = 9109 x 1078! kg

Proton rest mass, m, = 1672x107" kg

Neutron rest mass, m,, = 1675x1072" kg

Atomic mass unit (C!?=12),a.m.u. = 1-661 x 10-27 kg

Bohr magneton, jig =  9:27x 1074 Jitesla

Nuclear magneton, jin, =  5-05x 10727 Jitesla

Boltzmann constant, ky = 1381x1072 J/K
HJI-S-GPHY 1

SECTION A
Ql. (a) Vertical electrical sounding data recorded using Schlumberger electrode
configuration shows a three-layer H-type apparent resistivity curve.
This data was interpreted using partial curve matching technique.
Resistivity and thicknesses of first two layers were estimated as
P, = 100 Qm; P, = 10; hy = 10 m and hy = 20m i
Calculate the effective resistivity and effective thickness of a single
homogeneous and isotropic layer obtained by replacing the first two
layers into one single layer. 8
(b) What do you understand by the terms static self-potential and
pseudo-static self-potential used in SP log ? Explain positive, negative
and zero SP responses in terms of resistivity of formation water and
resistivity of mud filtrate. 8
(©) In time-domain electromagnetic sounding, decay response is recorded on
the surface of uniform earth with constant conductivity. Draw neat
schematic diagrams showing the characteristics of decay curve as a
function of time, in early, intermediate and late time zones. How does
decay response vary with increase and decrease of conductivity of
uniform half-space ? 8
(d) Illustrate with sketches the nature of Bouguer and free-air gravity
anomaly when a structure or region is 100%, 50% and 0% isostatically
compensated. 8
(e) If you took a gravimeter 1 km down a mine in rocks of density
2:4 gm/em3, how much would be the change in gravity compared to the
surface ? 8
@2. (a) What are the differences between stable and unstable types of
gravimeter ? How is sensitivity of unstable gravimeter increased in
comparison to stable type gravimeter ? Show mathematically. 15
(b) Discuss in detail ‘Reduction to Pole’ and “Pseudogravity
Transformation” methods for magnetic survey data. 15
HJI-S-GPHY 2

Q8. (a) Multielectrodes resistivity imaging data were recorded using
20 number of electrodes deployed along a line at constant inter-electrode
spacing of 1 m. All electrodes were connected to resistivity imaging
system through multi-core cable. Answer the following questions :
G _ Iftwo electrodes array is used for measurement, calculate the total
number of independent data points recorded. 3
Gi) If the Wenner array is used for measurement, calculate total
number of depth levels along with number of independent data
points in each depth level. 5
() Show that magnetotellurie impedance over the surface of uniform earth
with constant conductivity increases with frequency of plane
clectromagnetie wave propagating vertically downward in the earth,
Whereas phase of impedance is independent of frequency and
conductivity of uniform earth. 7
(©) What do you understand by Transverse Electric (TE) and Transverse
Magnetic (TM) modes used in two-dimensional magnetotelluric (MT)
modelling ? How does MT field split in TE and TM modes ? Explain your
answer with the help of Maxwell’s equations. Draw neat schematic
diagrams showing TE and TM modes apparent resistivity responses
along a profile passing through vertical resistivity discontinuity. Also
explain the features of apparent resistivity curve for TE and TM modes 15
Q4. (a) Taking Hooke’s law, Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio as a starting
point, derive from the first principles an expression relating the above
clastic modulus parameters using an appropriate set of stresses in the
Cartesian coordinate system. 15
(b) What are the main purposes of stacking ? Describe the Common Depth
Point (CDP) Stacking. 8
(©) How does a migrated reflection seismic section differ from an
unmigrated one ? 7
Q5. (a) (i) Obtain an expression for apparent resistivity for normal electrode
logging device, using appropriate form of potential, V, due to
current, I, injected through an electrode placed in a uniform whole
space at a distance r from the measuring electrode 7
HJI-S-GPHY 3

Gi A normal electrode device is placed in a medium composed of
three homogeneous and isotropic zones centered around the
current electrode, A. The first zone extends spherically to a radius
of 80 cm and has a resistivity of 20 Om. The second zone extends
spherically to a radius of 1-62 m and has a resistivity of 5 Om,
The third zone extends infinitely beyond the second zone and has
resistivity of 1 Qm. Calculate voltage and apparent resistivity
between electrode M and a distant electrode N for a 1 A current
and normal electrode spacing AM = 40 em. 8

4 ©) @ What do you understand by the term ‘Cycle Skipping’ in sonic
: logging ? Why can sonic log response not be used to estimate true
Porosity of formation in case of very low (< 5%) and very high
(> 50%) porosity ? 8
GD Compressional wave velocities in subsurface formation vary
between 3050 m/s and 7000 m/s, while in drilling fluid it is
1830 m/s. What is the variation in critical angle in degrees for
. these extreme velocities ? In a sonic logging device, if the
transmitter-receiver pair is separated by 90 cm centered in a
26 cm diameter borehole, calculate the actual distance of
formation traversed by a first arrival compressional wave, in case
of largest critical angle. 7
HJI-S-GPHY 4 -

SECTION B
Q6. (a) Lagrangian of a system is given by
L&yy, x y= 3 m(x2 +92) ; (x2 + y2 + xy).
m and k are constants. Find the frequencies of normal modes of the
system. 8
(b) Find the threshold kinetic energy of the incident proton in the
laboratory frame for the process : 8
p+p——> p+p+p+P
() A drunk starts out from lamp post in the middle of a street taking steps
of equal length either to the right or to the left, with equal probability.
What is the probability that the man will be at the lamp post again after
taking (i) 2N and (ii) 2N + 1 steps ? 8
(a) Describe the spectrum of hydrogen atom. Explain its hyperfine structure
with the help of L-S and J-J couplings. 8
(©) Describe the Yukawa’s nuclear potential model for nucleon-nucleon
interaction and also give the basic characteristics of nuclear forces. 8
Q7. (a) The motion of a particle in one dimension is described by the Lagrangian
L = } (x? — x4, in suitable units, Caleulate the value of the action
along the path from x = 0, at t = 0 to x= Xp, at t= to. 12
(>) A particle of mass m is subjected to the one-dimensional potential
Vix) = x3 + g x2 — 18x + 7. Find the frequency of smalll oscillation about
the stable equilibrium of the particle. 10
(© Two events separated by a distance 9 x 10%m along x-axis are
simultaneous in one inertial frame. Find the time interval between these
two events in a frame moving with a constant speed 0°8 c (where c is the
speed of light) along x-axis, with respect to the first inertial frame. 8
Q8. (a) What is Raman effect ? How can a Raman spectrum be used to
investigate the structural information of molecules ? 10
(b) How can electron diffraction pattern of TEM be used to determine the
crystal structure of a material ? 10
(©) What is Nuclear Magnetic Resonance ? Describe the principle and
working of an NMR spectrometer. 10
HIJI-S-GPHY 5

Q9. (a) Evaluate the partition function of a system of N non-interacting
one-dimensional quantum simple harmonic oscillators. Hence, calculate
the entropy and specific heat of the system. Show that quantum
mechanical oscillators do not follow the Equipartition theorem. 104545

(b) A one-dimensional simple harmonic oscillator with mass m, angular
frequency « is having energy between E, and E, with E, > Ey. Calculate
the phase space area available to the simple harmonic oscillator. Mark
the area in a schematic phase space diagram. 10

Q10. (a) What are the experimental evidences and observations that support
Nuclear Shell model ? Describe the shell model of a nucleus and its
limitations. 40

(b) What is the meaning of parity violation ? Briefly discuss the Co-60
experiment to demonstrate parity violation in weak interaction. 10

(c) What are the different fundamental interactions of nature ? Mention few
characteristics for each of them. Name the interactions via which the
following processes are occurring : 446
KOS ten
(i) m-+p > AC+KO
Gi) n + prety
(iv) 29 > y+y

(A > nen
! Wi) Ds nen
HII-S-GPHY 6