GEO-PHYSICS
Paper - III
eee
Question Paper Specific Instructions
Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting
questions :
There are TEN questions divided under TWO sections.
Candidate has to attempt SIX questions in all.
Questions No. 1 and 6 are compulsory. Out of the remaining EIGHT questions, FOUR
questions are to be attempted choosing TWO from each section.
The number of marks carried by a question! part is indicated against it,
Neat sketches may be drawn to illustrate answers, wherever required. These shall be drawn
in the space provided for answering the question itself.
Unless otherwise mentioned, symbols and notations have their usual standard meanings.
~ Assume suitable data, if necessary, and indicate the same clearly.
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck off, attempt of a
question shall be counted even if attempted partly.
Any page or portion of the page left blank in the Question-cum-Answer Booklet must be
clearly struck off;
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only.
Constants which may be needed :
Kepler's constant = 3-986004418 x 10° km® s~
Mean radius of the Earth = 6378 km
Mass of electron (m, ) = 911x103 kg
Charge of electron (e) = 1-602x10-%¢
Planck’s constant (h) = 662 x 10-54 Js
Boltzmann’s constant (k) = 138% 1073 JK
Permittivity of free space (ey) = 8854 x 10-1? Fm7!
ee
HJI-T-GPHY 1

SECTION A
Qi. (a) What are scintillation counters ? Elucidate the applications and
significance of scintillation counters. 5
(b) Describe the FIR low-pass filter and design a Five Point Casual FIR
low-pass filter with a cut-off frequency @, = 0:4 7. 5
(c) What are shipboard operations and the Eétvés correction ? 5
(a) What is a Hydrophone ? What are the materials used in it ? Explain the
survey field operation procedure for it. 5
(e) Estimate the average drawdown over an area, where 25 million m® of
water has been pumped through a specific number of uniformly
distributed wells. The area is 150 km? and the specific yield of the

unconfined aquifer is 25 percent. 5

(® A field sample of unconfined aquifer was tested in a cylinder of length
and diameter 50cm and 6m, respectively. Under constant head
difference of 16-3 cm, 45:2 cm? of water was collected, after 3 minutes, at

the outlet. What is the hydraulic conductivity of the formation ? 5

(g) Mapping cameras having a format size of 230 mm are fitted with
152 mm focal length lenses. Determine the angular field of view
for such a combination of format size and focal length.

(ii) If the dimensions of a digital camera sensor are 10-40 cm in
across-track direction and 6:81 cm in the along-track direction,
and the camera has a 80 mm focal length lens, what are the
across-track and along-track angular fields of view for the
camera? giyets

2 2
(h) What is cross-correlation of signals ? Find out the cross-correlation of
two signals given below and plot it :
Xinl=[3 1 2]
YinJ=[3 2 1] 5
HJI-T-GPHY 2

Q2. (a) What is Radioactivity ? State the principles of radioactivity in the
radioactive decay process using a, B and y energy particles and
disintegration process. 10

(b) Discuss the Airborne double dipole electromagnetic system with
illustrations. 10

(c) What is spontaneous fission ? Elucidate the uranium, thorium and
related elemental concentration in the Earth’s crust and common rock
types. 10

3. (a) _ Discuss the Z-Transform and its application to the analysis of LTI with
example of determining the Z-Transform of the following finite duration
signals : 10
* LTI = Linear Time Invariant
@) x(n) = (1, 2, 5, 7,0,

t
Gi) —_-xp(n) = {1, 2, 5, 7,0, 1)
t
(ii) xg(n) = © 0, 1, 2, 5, 7,0, 1}
. (iv) x4(n) = (2, 4, & 7,0, 1)
(vw) xs(n) = 8)
(vi) x(n) = 6(n-k), k>0
(vii) x;(n) = 8(n +k), k>0
(b) Discuss the Realization of Linear Time Invariant system with difference
equations with illustrations. 10
(c) What is the time domain representation for the ideal low-pass frequency
response ? What is the time domain impulse response for an ideal low
frequency response filter with Q, = n/2? 10
Q4. (a) What are the different divisions of sea-floor ? Explain in detail with
suitable diagrams. 10
(b) What are the different marine seismic sources ? Discuss in detail about
air gun with suitable diagrams. 10
(c) How does oceanic heat flow and age vary with lithospheric age ? 10
HII-T-GPHY 3

Q5. (a) What is parallax ? Derive expressions to find out object height and
ground coordinate location from parallax measurement. 10
(b) Derive general flow equations for groundwater flow in Earth's media. 10
(c) Derive steady state radial flow to a well drilled in confined aquifer.
What will be the equation of radius of influence ?
A 30cm diameter well completely penetrates a confined aquifer
of hydraulic conductivity 45 m/day. The length of strainer is 20 m
Under steady state of pumping, the drawdown at the well was found to
be 30m and the radius of influence was 300m. Calculate the
discharge. 6+4=10
HJI-T-GPHY 4

SECTION B
Q6. (a) Distinguish between point group and space group. How do they help in
the study of crystals ? 44+1=5
(b) A transistor having «=0-975 and a reverse saturation current
Tco = 10 pA, is operated in CE configuration. What is B for this
configuration ? If the base current is 250 A, calculate the emitter
current and collector current. 24355
(©) Using Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution function, show that it is not
possible to construct a LASER with only two energy level states. 5
(d) “A temporally coherent beam is markedly monochromatic and a
spatially coherent beam is highly directional.” Explain this statement. 5
(e) _ Prove the following Boolean expression using De-Morgan’s theorems : 2+3=5
@  AB+CD= AB.CD
(i) (A. AB).(B. AB) = AB+ AB
(® Define Geostationary, Sun synchronous orbits and Molniya orbit and
their uses regarding satellite motion. 5
. (g) List the quantum mechanical operators associated with the following
physical quantities :
@ Linear momentum (p)
(ii) Potential energy (U(x))
(ii) Kinetic energy (p?/2m)
(iv) Total energy (E)
sameti a? 2x Fy
An eigenfunction of the operator a is yw =e™. Find the
ix
corresponding eigenvalue. 24325
; >> > 3
(h) Show that L? commutes with any component of L (Lx or Ly or L,)
and answer the following with justification :
@ Can we measure L”, L,, Ly and L, simultaneously and can all
have common wave function ?
(ii) Can we measure L? and L, simultaneously and can both have
common wave function ? 5
HJI-T-GPHY 5

Q7. (a) Ann-channel silicon JFET has a donor concentration of 2 x 10?1/m* and
a channel width of 4 um. If the dielectric constant of silicon is 12, find
the pinch-off voltage. If the JFET operates with a gate-source voltage
— 2 V, what is the saturation voltage Vpsat ? 743=10
(b) Define apogee, perigee and eccentricity of the orbit. How are they
related ? 6+4=10
(©) Sketch potential wells and quantized energy (E,) of harmonic oscillator
and hydrogen atom.
Show that the zero point energy of linear harmonic oscillator is a
manifestation of the uncertainty principle. 3+7=10
Q8. (a) (i) X-rays of wavelength 0-71 A are reflected from the (110)-plane of
a rock salt crystal of lattice constant a = 2-82 A. Calculate the
corresponding glancing angle for second order Bragg’s reflection. 5
(ii) Plot temperature dependence susceptibility (% ~ T) of diamagnetic,
paramagnetic and ferromagnetic substances.
Show that the perfect conductivity and perfect diamagnetism are
two essential and independent features of a superconductor. 3+2=5
(b) Describe the principle of semiconductor LASER. How is the population :
inversion obtained in semiconductor LASER ? Explain that the applied :
forward voltage must exceed hv/e, where y is the frequency of emitted
light. 5+5=10
(c) Take wave function of a particle in a box of infinite potential to be in a
form Yq=A sin“, where ‘L’ is the length of the box and ‘A’ is
constant. Find the normalized wave function.
Plot wave functions yj, v2, v3 and probability densities of a particle
confined to a box with rigid wall for infinite and finite potential. Give
suitable physical interpretations of all plots. 5+5=10
Q9. (a) Show with a circuit diagram the use of Op-Amp in a non-inverting
amplifier, Obtain an expression for the voltage gain of this amplifier.
How can the circuit be modified to achieve a voltage follower ? What are
its uses ? 34+443=10
(b) Explain how light is guided by an optical fibre. Define the acceptance
angle and the numerical aperture. How are they related to the refractive
indices of the core and the cladding ? 34+443=10
HJI-T-GPHY 6

(c) (i) Discuss about the validity criterion of WKB approximation. Why
is it called semi-classical ? 5
(ii) Derive Klein-Gordon equation for a relativistic free particle. 5
Q10. (a) What are the basic segments of a microprocessor ? Give the block
diagram of different registers of 8085 microprocessor and explain
functions of Flags, Program Counter and Stack Pointer. 34+44+3=10
(b) Discuss Natural broadening and Doppler broadening. Using Heisenberg
Uncertainty Principle, show that each energy level of LASER must have
a spread. What do you mean by full width at half maximum or FWHM
for broadening ? 5+3+2=10
(©) @)_—_ Convert (247-6875);9 into octal number. 5
(ii) Design a Ring Counter using flip-flops and explain its working. 5
HJI-T-GPHY 7