Contined S:2Sce'd Sie 2000
GEOLOGY
Paper - III
Time Allowed : Three Hours | Maximum Marks : 200
ee
Question Paper Specific Instructions
Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting
questions :
There are ELEVEN questions divided under SIX sections.
Candidate has to attempt SIX questions in all.
The ONLY question in Section A is compulsory.
Out of the remaining TEN questions, the candidate has to attempt FIVE, choosing ONE
from each of the other Sections B, C, D, E and F.
The number of marks carried by a question part is indicated against it.
Unless otherwise mentioned, symbols, abbreviations and notations have their usual
standard meanings.
Neat sketches are to be drawn to illustrate answers, wherever required. They shall be
drawn in the space provided for answering the question itself.
Wherever required, graphs/tables are to be drawn on the Question-cum-Answer Booklet
itself.
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck off, attempt of a
question shall be counted even if attempted partly.
"Any page or portion of the page left blank in the Question-cum-Answer Booklet must be
clearly struck off.
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only.
Se
HJL-T-GLGY 1

SECTION A
(Compulsory Section)
Ql. Describe the following in brief with diagrams, wherever necessary :
(a) Effect of Great Oxidation Event on certain ore forming processes 5
(b) _ Exsolution and replacement intergrowth textures in ore minerals 5
(©)  Mangampeta barite deposit 5
(a) Byproducts from base metal deposits of India 5
(©) _ Core-logging and information deciphered from core-samples 5
(© Significant and non-significant geochemical anomalies 5
(@ Engineering properties of rocks for civil engineering applications 5
(h) Migration of oil 5
@ Environmental significance of mangroves 5
@ Earth's Radiation Budget and factors affecting its heat balance 5
HJI-T-GLGY 2

SECTION B
Attempt any one question.
Q2. (a) Explain how metals are transported by hydrothermal fluids and what
are the causes of ore deposition in various types of hydrothermal
deposits. 15
(b) Discuss the genesis of lateritic bauxite deposits, highlighting the
important parameters which control their formation. Write a note on the
geology of East Coast Bauxite deposits of India. 15
Q8. (a) A quartz grain has a cubic aqueous biphase inclusion containing a liquid
and a spherical vapour bubble. The sides of cubic inclusion are 2 microns
and the diameter of vapour bubble is 2 microns. Calculate the degree of
fill of the fluid inclusion. 10
(b) What are the geological settings in which chrysotile deposits are
formed ? Explain the process of chrysotile mineralization in these
settings. 10
(©) Explain how the temperature of mineralization can be constrained based
on the fractionation of S isotopes in an ore mineral assemblage. 10
HJI-T-GLGY 3 Tt

SECTION C
Attempt any one question.
Q4. (a) Explain the process of formation of muscovite and rare metal deposits in
granitic pegmatites. Discuss on the geology of important muscovite
deposits in the Indian Shield. 15
(b) Describe the geological characteristics of the following mineral deposits
of Aravalli Craton and arrange them in chronological order :
Khetri copper belt, Tosham tin and Jhamarkotra phosphorite. 15
Q5. (a) Discuss the geological characteristics and genesis of Agucha Zn-Pb
deposit. 10
(b) Write a note on the geology of BIF hosted iron-ore deposits in Western
Dharwar Craton. 10
(©) Describe various methods by which mineral resources can be conserved. 10
HJLT-GLGY 4

SECTION D
Attempt any one question.
Q6. (a) What are ore guides ? Explain the mineralogical and physiographic
guides and discuss their significance in mineral exploration. 15
(b) Why is soil geochemical survey the most commonly employed technique
in mineral exploration ? Describe the method of geochemical survey in
residual soils. 15
Q7. (a) The sample width and assay values for copper and zinc are obtained in a
sulphide ore prospect and are given below. Calculate the average sample
width and the average grade for copper and zinc. 10
Sample | Sample width | Assay value of | Assay value of
No. (in meters) Cu (in %) Zn (in %)
a
jo 2 |e oe |
(«| 0
Lis | 66 | ss Ts
(b) What is channel sampling ? Explain the steps involved in channel
sampling. Add a note on the biases which should be avoided during
sampling. 10
(©) Discuss the application of seismic method of prospecting with a note on
its limitations. 10
HULT-GLGY 5 a4

SECTION E
Attempt any one question.
Q8. (a) Critically discuss the different geological investigations required in dam
sites. 15
(b) What factors are responsible for coastal erosion ? Explain the method of
constructing coastal protection structures. 15
Q9. (a) Discuss the characteristics of source and reservoir rock for
hydrocarbons. 10
(b) Describe the geology of dolostone hosted uranium deposits in Cuddapah
Basin. 10
(©) _ Give an account of tectonic controls in the formation of Gondwana coals. 10
HJL-T-GL6Y 6

SECTION F
Attempt any one question.
Q10. (a) What are Milankovitch cycles ? Discuss and illustrate diagrammatically
as to how global climate variations are correlated with Milankovitch
cycles. 15
(b) Describe geochemical cycle of carbon and discuss how an increase of CO.
in the atmosphere causes ocean acidification. 15
Ql. (a) Elaborate the various causes and consequences of landslides. 10
(b) Which are the important glaciers of the Himalayas ? Discuss the
magnitude and significance of any two of these glaciers in the context of
the environment. 10
(©) _ Discuss critically the environmental impacts of urbanization. 10
HJI-T-GL6Y 7 i