Comet Gon estst 9) Exam, 2220, [natF-ciGy]
GEOLOGY
Paper -I
Time Allowed : Three Hours [Maximum Marks : 200
ee
Question Paper Specific Instructions
Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting
questions :
There are ELEVEN questions divided under SIX Sections.
Candidate has to attempt SIX questions in all.
; The ONLY question in Section A is compulsory.
|, Out of the remaining TEN questions, the candidate has to attempt FIVE, choosing ONE
from each of the other Sections B, C, D, E and F.
The number of marks carried by a question |part is indicated against it,
Unless otherwise mentioned, symbols, abbreviations and notations have their usual
standard meanings.
Neat sketches are to be drawn to illustrate. answers, wherever required. They shall be
drawn in the space provided for answering the question itself.
Wherever required, graphs/tables are to be drawn on the Question-cum-Answer Booklet
itself.
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck off, attempt of a
question shall be counted even if attempted partly.
Any page or portion of the page left blank in the Question-cum-Answer Booklet must be
clearly struck off.
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only.
SSS
HJLF-GLGY 1

SECTION A
(Compulsory Section)
Ql. Describe the following in brief with diagrams, wherever
necessary : 5x10=50
(a) Isostasy 5
(b) _In-sequence, out-of-sequence and back-thrusting 5
(©) _ Relief displacement in aerial photos 5
(@) — Cataclasites and Mylonites 5
(e) _ Principles of sequence stratigraphy 5
(® | Taphonomy 5
(g) _ Singhbhum Craton 5
(h) Binomial nomenclature 5
@ Concept of flow regime 5
@ — Syringothyris Limestone 5
HJL-F-GLGY 2

SECTION B
Attempt any one question.
Q2. (a) Describe the Indian Remote Sensing (IRS) P-series of satellites with
special emphasis on the sensors used in each, and their characteristics, 15
(b) Describe electromagnetic spectrum and energy available for sensing.
Describe ranges of spectrum transmitted through the atmosphere and
available for space-borne sensing. 15
Q3. (a) Describe conditions required for delta formation. Give reasons why no
deltas are formed in the western coastal margin while many deltas are
found in the eastern coastal margin of India. 10
(b) Describe different geomorphological features formed by the valley and
continental glaciers. 10
(©) Describe the Earth’s internal structure as revealed by seismic waves, 10
HJLE-GLGY a Tae

SECTION C
Attempt any one question.
@4. (a) Describe the procedure of structural analysis of an area that has
undergone single event and polyphase event. 15
(b) What are the characteristics of ductile shear zone ? Describe with neat
diagrams of different shear indicators used for sense of shear along a
shear zone. 15
Q5. (a) What characteristic of Flinn’s k enables us to determine the kind of
strain in deformed rocks ? 10
(b) What are the parameters required to measure and estimate to classify a
fold as per Ramsay's classification from fold profile ? 10
() With neat diagram, describe Foliation boudinage and Classical
boudinage. Also write their differences. 10
HJLF-GLEY 4

SECTION D
Attempt any one question.
Q6. (a) What is Walther’s law of facies succession ? Substantiate your answer by
discussing fluvial facies model. 15
(b) Describe significant penecontemporaneous _(synsedimentary)
deformational structures. Give criteria of their distinction from tectonic
deformational structures. 15
Q7. (a) Describe the procedure of paleocurrent analysis. Comment on its
significance giving suitable examples. 10
(b) With the help of neat sketches, describe the sedimentary basin in a
convergent margin ocean basin. 10
(©) Describe the factors which control the composition of sandstone. 10
HJL-GLGY 5 wet

SECTION E :
Attempt any one question.
Q8. (a) Give a brief account of the Lower Gondwana flora and add a note on
their geographic and stratigraphic distribution. 15
(b) Illustrate with neat sketches the structural modification in Trilobites.
Discuss the adaptive modification in Trilobites. 15
Q9. (a) Give an account of the evolutionary history of Hominidae. 10
(b) Explain with diagram the bi-phasic life cycle in Foraminifera. 10
(©) How do you distinguish between Regular and Irregular Echinoids ? 10
HJI-F-GLGY 6

SECTION F
Attempt any one question.

Q10. (a) Give the stratigraphic succession of Cuddapah Supergroup and comment
on the age, tectonics and Basin evolution. 15

(b) What was the paleogeographic set-up during Lower Cambrian times ?

Discuss the Precambrian —- Cambrian boundary problem in Indian
context. 15

Qll. (a) Give a brief account on the Lameta Formation and comment on its
depositional environment and fauna. 10

(b) Elucidate the hierarchical classification and definition of

chronostratigraphic units and add on the litho-bio-chrono-stratigraphic
correlation. 10

(©) Give an account of stratigraphy, sedimentation and fauna of Siwalik
Supergroup. 10

HJL-F-GLGY 7 i