Combined Geo-Scientist
(Main) Exam,2021
GEO-PHYSICS
Paper - II
Question Paper Specific Instructions
“Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting
questions :
There are TEN questions divided under TWO sections.
Candidate has to attempt SIX questions in all.
Questions no, Land 6 are compulsory.
Out of the remaining EIGHT questions, FOUR questions are to be attempted choosing
TWO from each section.
The number of marks carried by a question | part is indicated against it.
Neat sketches may be drawn to illustrate answers, wherever required. These shall be drawn
in the space provided for answering the question itself.
Unless otherwise mentioned, symbols and notations have their usual standard meanings.
Assume suitable data, if necessary, and indicate the same clearly.
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck off, attempt of a
question shall be counted even if attempted partly.
Any page or portion of the page left blank in the Question-cum-Answer Booklet must be
clearly struck off.
“Answers must be written in ENGLISH only.
Physical Constants :
Electron rest mass, m, = 9109x1078 kg
Proton rest mass, m,, = 1672x107" kg
Neutron rest mass, m,, = 1675 x 10-27 kg
Atomic mass unit (C!2=12),a.mu. = — 1-661 10727 kg
Bohr magneton, jig =  9:27« 1074 Jtesla
Nuclear magneton, t1y =  5-05x 10-27 Jtesla
Boltzmann constant, kp, = 1881x107 J/K
SDT-S-GPH 1

- SECTION A
QI. (a) Draw a neat sketch explaining the elements of the Earth's magnetic
field. Write down the Poisson's relation between gravity potential and
magnetic potential. 8
(b) The apparent resistivity measured with Wenner and Schlumberger
electrodes configurations is the same, when equal amount of current is
passed through the current electrodes and equal potential difference is .
recorded between pair of potential electrodes. If the Wenner
configuration electrodes spacing is 10m and in Schlumberger
configuration potential electrodes spacing is 20 m, estimate the current
electrodes spacing for the Schlumberger configuration. 8
(©) Define multiples. Distinguish between short-path and_long-path
multiples with the help of neat sketch for the case of horizontal beds. 8
(d) Find coefficient of anisotropy of a geoelectrical section consisting of an
alternating series of beds with a total thickness of 10 m, the individual
bed being homogeneous and isotropic, one meter thick and with
resistivities alternating between 10 Qm and 100 Qm. 8
(©) Define the term ‘Hydrogen Index’ used in neutron porosity logging. How
can the combination of neutron and density porosity logs be used as gas
log? 8
Q2. (a) In frequency domain electromagnetic prospecting survey, a
Transmitter (T) and a Receiver (R) loops are placed at a test site in free
space. If harmonically time varying current of 1000 Hz and magnitude,
I, of 2A in the transmitter loop produces induced emf in receiver loop of
magnitude 1 volt, calculate mutual inductance between transmitter and
receiver loop along with the phase difference between transmitter
current and induced emf in the receiver loop for harmonic transmitter
current represented by I = I, cos wt. 7
SOT-S-GPH 2

(b) In a circuit theory approach, frequency domain electromagnetic
prospecting is represented by three loops defined as a Transmitter (T), a
Receiver (R) and a buried Conductor (C) in the ground. Buried conductor
is represented by a Resistor (R) and an inductor (L) connected in
series, Assuming mutual inductance between each pair of loops as
Myc (Transmitter-Conductor), Mc (Conductor-Receiver) and
Myp (Transmitter-Receiver); obtain secondary emf normalized by
primary emf induced in the receiver loop for a harmonic transmitter

- current (Ip) with magnitude I, and angular frequency, o, as Ip = I, e*.
Draw neat response curve in terms of in-phase, quadrature and phasor
diagram. 8

(c) What do you understand by first approximation in the interpretation of

three-dimensional anomalies of gravity data ?

Derive expression for gravity anomaly due to buried spherical body.

Explain the methodology to obtain the depth of centre of spherical body. 15
Q3. (a) What do you understand by resonance magnetometers ? Write down the

names of two resonance magnetometers.

Explain the working principle of the Alkali Vapour Magnetometer. 8

(b) What is meant by stable and unstable gravimeters ? Write down
at least two names from each category.

Write down the names of at least five corrections to gravity
observations. Briefly explain the drift correction. 7

(c) Applying appropriate electromagnetic boundary conditions, show that
‘TM-mode magnetotellurie apparent resistivity curve, plotted along a
profile passing through a vertical resistivity interface boundary, is
discontinuous. Draw TM-mode magnetotellurie apparent resistivity
curve along a profile passing through vertical resistivity interface
boundary separating two mediums of resistivities 10 Qm and 100 Qm.
Explain characteristics of this apparent resistivity curve. 8

(a) Starting from the expression of magnetotellurie impedance for a
two-layer medium, find the phase of impedance at low frequency part for
perfectly conducting and insulating second basement layer. 7

SDT-S-GPH 3

Q4. (a) Draw ray path geometry for a dipping interface and its travel
time distance graph along with suitable notations for different
parameters.

Explain the procedure to compute travel time for dipping interface. 8
(b) Compute depth of a horizontal refractor/interface using intercept time
method for
Vj = 450 m/sec.
V2 = 1200 m/sec.
and intercept time, T; = 75 milliseconds. 7
(c) Using an expression for potential due to a point current source, I, placed
at a distance, r, in uniform medium of constant resistivity, p, derive an
expression for apparent resistivity response for lateral log device. Draw
appropriate response curve of lateral resistivity logging device passing
through a thick resistive bed. Also explain various features of the
response curve. 15

Q5. (a) Explain different layouts for a common-shot gather, a common
mid-point gather and a common receiver gather using suitable sketches.
What do you understand by constant (optimum) offset method of
shallow seismic reflection survey ?

Write down the sequential steps of the basic seismic data processing
flow chart. 15
(b) Resistivity log response is recorded using lateral device consisting of
three electrodes defined by characters A, M and N respectively. The
distance between electrodes : AM = 5m and AN = 5-5 m. When a 2A
current is circulated between current electrode, A, and a distant
electrode, B, situated at the surface, a signal of 10 mV is measured
between electrodes M and N. Calculate the apparent resistivity of the
medium that surrounds the logging device. 7
(c) Define the condition in which spontaneous potential (SP) log response
cannot be used to differentiate between clean sand and shale formations.
How can natural gamma ray log response be used as substitute of SP log
to identify clean sand and shale formations ? Also define the term ‘shale
index’ used in natural gamma ray log. 8
SDT-S-GPH 4

SECTION B
Q6. (a) Derive an expression for Hamiltonian for a particle having charge q,
moving in an electromagnetic field. The potential energy of the particle
> >
is V=q(0- V.A), where 0 and A are scalar and vector potentials
respectively. 8
(b) With what velocity should a rod be moved in the direction inclined at 45°
to its length for getting contraction of 20% in the length of rod ? 8
. (©) Show that the entropy of a system in canonical ensemble can be
expressed as
o=-> pjlogp;
i
where p; is the probability of the system to be found in it state. 8
(d) The quantum numbers of two electrons in a two valence electron atom
are
ny =6, 1) =3, 5 = 4
1-6, =3, = 5
1
2 = 5, Ig=1, = 4
ng=6, lg 82 2
(i) Assuming L ~ S coupling, find the possible values of L and hence of J.
(ii) Assuming j —j coupling, find the possible value of J. 8
(©) If 10-9 kg of radioactive isotope (atomic mass 226) emits 3-72 x 101
alpha particles in a second, (i) calculate the half-life of the isotope.
(ii) Calculate the average energy of the o-particles if 4-2 x 102 joules
- energy is released in an hour. 8
Q7. (a) Using Hamilton’s equation of motion find the differential equation for
planetary motion. Let us assume force fir) = -
Show that areal velocity is constant. r 10
(b) At normal pressure 1-031 x 10° N/m? and temperature 0°C the volume
of 2 grams of water increases from 1-0 cc to 181 ce on freezing. What
will be the change in its internal energy ? The latent heat of melting of
ice = 80 cal/gram. 10
SDT-S-GPH 5

(©) i) Explain ‘First-Order Stark Effect’ and ‘Second-Order Stark Effect’.
(ii) ‘The far infrared rotational absorption spectrum of a diatomic
molecule shows equilibrium lines with spacing 20 em~!, What will
be the position of first Stokes line in the rotational Raman
spectrum of this molecule ? 10
Q8. (a) Using first law of thermodynamics, establish the relation between two
principal specific heats of a gas. 10
(b) Define canonical transformation. For a certain canonical transformation
it is known that .
Q= Via? +p?)
1 qa,1
F= 5(q2+p®) tan! 44 —
gt +P ) tan 7 +50P
Find P(q, p) and P(q, Q). 10
(©) (i) Whyis the reaction e* + e~ ——> yt + 1 forbidden ?
(ii) A pion at rest decays into a muon and a neutrino. Find the energy
and velocity of the outgoing muon, in terms of two masses m, and
my. (Assume m, = 0) 10
Q9. (a) (i) _ Explain ‘Normal Zeeman Effect’ and ‘Anomalous Zeeman Effect’.
(ii) In a Normal Zeeman Effect experiment, spectral splitting of the
line at the wavelength 643-8 nm corresponding to the transition
51D. ——> 5'!P, of cadmium atoms is to be observed. The
spectrometer has a resolution of 0-01 nm. Calculate the minimum
magnetic field needed to observe this.
(mg = 9:1 x 10-31 kg, e = 16 x 10-19 C, ¢ = 3 x 108 m/s) 100
(b) (i) Why does fusion reaction take place at high temperature ?
(ii) A nuclear reactor using g9U?° is operated at a power level of
250 mega watts. If the energy released per fission of g2U?85 is
200 MeV, calculate the rate of consumption of U3 per year.
Assuming that there are no losses and the mass of atom is equal
to the sum of mass of nucleus where each nucleon has a mass
equal to 1 amu. 10
(c) A particle has kinetic energy of 72 MeV and momentum 375 MeV/c. Find
its mass (in MeV/c”) and speed (as a fraction of c). 10
SDT-S-GPH 6

Q10. (a) (i) Explain the terms mass defect, missing energy and binding
energy of a nucleus.

(ii) The binding energy per nucleon of deuteron (jH) and helium
nucleus (jHe) is 1:1 MeV and 7 MeV respectively. If two
deuteron nuclei react to form a single helium nucleus, how much
energy will be released ? 10

(b) (i) The spectroscopic symbol for the ground state of ;3Al is 2Pyp.
Under the action of a strong magnetic field (when L — $ coupling
can be neglected) the ground state energy level will split. What
will be the number of splitting levels ?

. (ii) A diatomic molecule has vibrational states with energy
E, = ho (» + 3) and rotational states with energies Ey = BG +2,
where v and j are non-negative integers. Consider the transitions
in which both the initial and final states are restricted to v < 1 and
j < 2 and subject to the selection rule Av = + 1 and Aj = + 1.
Calculate the largest allowed energy of transition. 10

(©) Calculate the value of partition function for the four energy levels shown

in the figure assuming that the particles obey Maxwell-Boltzmann
statistics and B = 2-0 per energy unit. Also compute the fractional

populations of the four energy levels. 10

g=0 g=leu g=2eu g=3eu

KE, KE, KE, /KE, KE, KE,/ KE, KE, KE,|/KE, KE, KE,
0 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1
‘ 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 2 0
. i) 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 2
2 0 0 2 1 0
| 0 2 0 0 1 2
0 0 2 2 0 1 |

0 2 1
3 0 3
0 3 0
0 0 3

g=1 g,=3 g,=6 g,=10

SDT-S-GPH 7