Combined Seo-Sctentist
(Main) E2024 SDT-T-HYD
HYDROGEOLOGY
Time Allowed : Three Hours Maximum Marks : 200
Question Paper Specific Instructions

Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting
questions :

There are NINE questions divided under FIVE sections.

Candidate has to attempt FIVE questions in ail.

The ONLY question in Section A is compulsory.

Out of the remaining EIGHT questions, the candidate has to attempt FOUR, choosing
ONE from each of the other Sections B, C, D and E.

The number of marks carried by a question /part is indicated against it.

Symbols, abbreviations and notations have their usual standard meanings.

Neat sketches are to be drawn to illustrate answers, wherever required.

Wherever required, graphs/tables are to be drawn on the Question-cum-Answer Booklet
itself.
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck off, attempt of a
question shall be counted even if attempted partly.
Any page or portion of the page left blank in the Question-cum-Answer Booklet must be
clearly struck off.
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only.
a
SDT-T-HYD 1

SECTION A
(Compulsory Section)
Ql. Write short notes on the following in not more than 5 sentences
each : 5x8=40
(a) Infiltration 5
(b) Cavity Wells 5
(©) Terrameter 5
(4) Incrustation and Corrosion 5
(e) Saline and Alkaline Soils 5
() — Conjunctive Use of Groundwater 5
(g) Groundwater Budget 5
(h) — Piezometrie Surface 5
SDT-T-HYD 2

SECTION B
Attempt any one question.
Q2. (a) Give an account of the vertical distribution of groundwater. Describe the
controlling factors of soil water movement in unsaturated zone. 15
(b) | What are springs ? How are they classified ? 15
(c) Explain the laboratory method of determination of permeability. 10
Q3. (a) Explain water table contour and flow nets. How are water table contour
maps useful in the identification of flow boundaries ? 15
(b) Describe the aquifer properties of common crustal rocks. Explain specific
yield of common formation material. 15
(c) Following data is obtained from an area. Find out the groundwater
storage. 10
Area = 1 km?
Rainfall = 500 mm
Normal fluctuation of water table = 2:2 m
Specific yield = 2%
SDT-T-HYD 3

SECTION C
Attempt any one question.
@4. (a) Explain the logic and principles behind pumping tests. Describe the
methods of evaluating the efficacy of an open dug well. 15
(b) Describe Bailer and Slug methods of testing the wells. 10
(c) A 20 cm well penetrates 40 m below static water level. After a long
period of pumping at a rate of 1500 Ipm, the drawdown in the wells at
10 m and 25 m from the pumped well were 1-5 m and 0°5 m respectively.
Determine the transmissibility of the aquifer. 15
Q5. (a) Discuss the pros and cons of bore wells and open wells. Describe the
procedure for designing a tube well drilled in multiple layers of confined
aquifer. 15
(b) Describe the various drilling equipment and their applications in diverse
geological formations. 15
(©) Describe the impact of global climate change on groundwater. 10
SDT-T-HYD 4

SECTION D
Attempt any one question.
Q6. (a) What are the important criteria for selection of a site for sinking well
(open well) of a medium to high yielding type ? 15
| (b) Explain the electrical resistivity method for locating a suitable bore well
ina hard rock terrain. 10
(c) Write notes on the following : 15
(i) Radioactive Logging
(ii) Sonic Logging
(iii) Downhole Photography
Q7. (a) Explain the fundamentals and advancements in remote sensing
techniques for groundwater exploration. 15
(b) Briefly describe various procedures for developing a completed tube well. 15
(©) Write notes on the following : 10
(i) ‘Tracer Logging
(ii) Seismic Refraction Method
SDT-T-HYD 5 |

SECTION E
Attempt any one question.
Q8. (a) Explain how lithology and climate affect the composition of
groundwater. List down the physical and chemical parameters of potable
water as per WHO standards. 15
(b) Describe various ways of representing the chemical data of groundwater. 15
(©) Evaluate the conditions of coastal aquifers. Explain the relationship
between fresh water — salt water interface in a sedimentary sequence
and alluvial sediments. 10
Q9. (a) Briefly describe the groundwater potential in India. 15
(b) Explain stable and unstable isotopes. Discuss the stable isotopes
commonly used in groundwater studies. 10
(c) _ Explain the various artificial recharge methods being followed in India. 15
SDT-T-HYD 6