Combined Geo-Scientist
(Maia) Exam,2024 SOTFGLY
GEOLOGY
Paper -I
Time Allowed : Three Hours Maximum Marks : 200
Question Paper Specific Instructions
Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting
questions :
There are ELEVEN questions divided under SIX sections.
Candidate has to attempt SIX questions in all. ba
The ONLY question in Section A is compulsory.
Out of the remaining TEN questions, the candidate has to attempt FIVE, choosing ONE
from each of the other Sections B, C, D, E and F.
The number of marks carried by a question part is indicated against it.
Unless otherwise mentioned, symbols, abbreviations and notations have their usual
standard meanings.
Neat sketches are to be drawn to illustrate answers, wherever required. They shall be
drawn in the space provided for answering the question itself.
Wherever required, graphs/tables are to be drawn on the Question-cum-Answer Booklet
itself.
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck off, attempt of a
a question shall be counted even if attempted partly.
Any page or portion of the page left blank in the Question-cum-Answer Booklet must be
clearly struck off.
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only.
SDT-F-6LY 1

SECTION A
(Compulsory Section)
Ql. Describe the following in brief with diagrams, wherever
necessary : 5x10=50
(a) ‘S’and ‘P’ wave shadow zone 5
(b) Rayleigh and Mie scattering 5
(c)  Crenulation cleavage 5
(@) Pure shear and Simple shear 5
(e) _ Factors controlling base-level changes 5
(fp) Gravity flows 5
(g) _ Permineralization and Petrifaction 5
(h) Causes and effects of Cretaceous/Paleogene K/Pg Mass Extinction 5
(i) Assemblage zone and its Indian examples 5
@ Bagh formation 5
al
SDTF-GLY 2 |

SECTION B
Attempt any one question.
Q2. (a) Describe spectral, radiometric, spatial and temporal resolutions in
remote sensing. 15
(b) Describe microwave remote sensing and enumerate its advantages. Add
a note on distortions involved in this type of remote sensing. 15
Q8. (a) Describe in brief various fluvial landforms. 10
(b) Describe the major features of the deep ocean floor and discuss the
mechanism of their formation. 10
(©) Give a brief account of major geomorphic features of Peninsular India. 10
SOTFGLY 3

SECTION C

Attempt any one question.

Q4. (a) Define dip isogon and describe the fold classification based on dip
isogons, with suitable figures. In a multilayered rock system, which
isogonal fold class will competent and incompetent layers display,
respectively ? 15

(b) Describe transpression, transtension and flower structures in the
context of strike-slip movements during faulting. 15

Q5. (a) Discuss the brittle and plastic deformation mechanisms operating at the

micro-scale in rocks. 10
(b) Draw a left lateral shear zone and mark the S-plane, the C-plane and

the location of the largest strain in the shear zone. If S-planes are

oriented at high angles (> 45°) to the C-planes, what can be the

chronological relation ? 10
(©) What are balanced sections ? Explain how they are balanced and add a

note on the conditions for balancing cross-sections. 10

SDT-F-GLY 4

SECTION D
Attempt any one question.
Q6. (a) Explain the various types of shallow-water carbonate platforms and
discuss development of facies in response to sea-level change. be
(b) Define delta and explain delta sub-environments. Discuss diagnostic
properties of various types of deltas. 15
Q7. (a) Explain types of systems tracts that develop in depositional sequence
with suitable sketch. 10
(b) Compare the facies model of meander and braided fluvial system. 10
(©) Differentiate between wave-dominated and tide-dominated shallow
marine clastic environment. 10
SOT-F-GLY 5

SECTION E
Attempt any one question.
Q8. (a) Illustrate with neat sketches the morphology of Graptolites and
comment on its time significance in stratigraphy. 15
(b) Discuss briefly the morphology of Dinoflagellates and add a note on their
paleoecological significance. 15
Q9. (a) Explain briefly methods of preparation of organic-walled microfossils. 10
(b) Give a brief account of applications of paleontological data in
stratigraphy and paleoclimatology. 10
(©) Describe briefly various evolutionary trends in Equidae. 10
‘SOT-F-GLY 6

SECTION F
Attempt any one question.
Q10. (a) What is stratigraphic correlation ? Discuss important physical and
paleobiological criteria of stratigraphic correlation. 15
(b) Give the stratigraphic succession of Gondwana sequence and discuss its
classification, lithology and floral significance. 15
Q11. (a) Explain briefly as to how the principles of stratigraphy help in building
stratigraphic record. 10
(b) Discuss stratigraphy and tectonic evolution of Singhbhum Craton.
Explain why only certain parts of Singhbhum Craton are highly
mineralized. 10
(©) Discuss the nature and stratigraphic position of Panjal Traps and
associated voleano-sedimentary rocks. 10
SOT-F-GLY 7