Combined Geo-Scientist
(Main) Exam,2021
SDT-F-GPH
GEO-PHYSICS
Paper -I
Time Allowed : Three Hours Maximum Marks : 200
Question Paper Specific Instructions

Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting
questions :
There are TEN questions divided under TWO sections.
Candidate has to attempt SIX questions in all.
Questions No. 1 and 6 are compulsory.
Out of the remaining EIGHT questions, FOUR questions are to be attempted choosing
TWO from each section.
The number of marks carried by a question /part is indicated against it.
Neat sketches may be drawn to illustrate answers, wherever required. These shall be drawn
in the space provided for answering the question itself.
Unless otherwise mentioned, symbols and notations have their usual standard meanings.
Assume suitable data, if necessary, and indicate the same clearly.
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck off, attempt of a
question shall be counted even if attempted partly.
Any page or portion of the page left blank in the Question-cum-Answer Booklet must be
clearly struck off.
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only.
SDT-F-GPH 1

SECTION A
Ql. (a) What is the difference in the length, in kilometers, at the Earth's
surface, between a degree of latitude at equator and at the pole ? 10
(b) The angle of inclination and declination of a remanent magnetization of
basalt are observed as 45° and 60°, respectively, at present location of
30°N, 25°E. Calculate the magnetic latitude of this site at the time of
magnetization of basalt. Find out the latitude and longitude of the
palaeomagnetic pole. 10
(©) Calculate the amount of increase in seismic energy released from the
earthquake for the following : 10
(i) When surface-wave magnitude increases from 5 to 6; 6 to 7 and
708.
(i) When body-wave magnitude increases from 5 to 6; 6 to 7 and 7 to 8.
(a) Explain the concept of Tikhonov regularization in context to the inverse
problem, and explain what is an L-curve solution. 10
Q2. (a) Calculate the depth and density beneath a 5-km-high Himalayan
bt mountain chain in isostatic equilibrium with a 35-km-thick continental
crust of density 28 g/cc and a mantle of density 3:3 g/ec by using the
hypotheses of (i) Pratt, and (ii) Airy. 545
(b) Derive heat-conduction equations for an Earth model having low
temperature at upper surface as compared to high temperature at lower
surface. 10
(c) How do density, gravity and pressure vary radially in the interior of the
Earth ? Derive equations and discuss them with suitable figures related
to variations of these physical properties. 10
Q8. (a) How are seismic waves attenuated during propagation from the source? 10
(b) What is earthquake magnitude ? Describe body-wave, surface-wave and
moment magnitude with the help of suitable equations. 10
(c) The first-arrival time-distance data from a seismic refraction survey
were plotted and the best line fits have the slope of 0:22222 s km71,
0-164474 skm=1, 0-153846 skm=! and 0-119760 s km~1, respectively.
Intercept times were observed to be 100s, 1:90s and 8-705,
respectively, from the plot. Compute the velocity-depth structure and
thickness of the crustal layer. 10
SDT-F-GPH 2

Q4. (a) Show that the least square solution is same as the maximum likelihood
solution when errors are normally distributed. 10
(b) Consider you have a constitutive equation that relates X and m as
follows :
F(X, m) = F(x, x2, x3, mz, my)
= Bmyx1XXg + 2myMy x7 Xo ~ 4xy + 2m) +6
Find the gradient with respect to ¥ and m. (Find Vy F and Vy, F). 10
(©) Consider an earthquake is recorded at N stations. Using the P-wave
arrival time at all the stations and the triangulation approach, we wish
to find the origin location and time of event. Consider the earthquake
occurred in a homogeneous space with a known wave velocity V.
(i) Define the data space and model space, and the constitutive
relation between them.
(ii) What does the partial derivative matrix G look like ? (Show
derivation). What is the dimension of G?
(iii) Demonstrate how you can find the solution to this problem. 2+4+4
Q5. (a) Solve the following system of equations using both — Jacobi method and
Gauss-Seidel method, and show results after 3 iterations :
21 1 4
-1 30 1/X=)-5
12 -4 6
Let the starting vector be X°= (0,0, 0). 10
(b) Derive the expression for gravitational field due to a uniform ring of
mass M along its axial direction. Find the distance from the centre of the
ring at which the gravitational field will be maximum. 10
(c) Describe Gauss divergence theorem. Compute the flux of the vector
Es
field F =(x—y,x +z, z—y) through the surface of the cone x2 + y? = 22,
0 <z<1 along with circular top. 10
SDT-F-GPH 3

SECTION B
Q6. (a) Write matrix eigenvalue equation showing eigenvalue and eigenvector.
Find eigenvalues of the matrix A. 10
3-5 -4
A=|-5 -6 -5
-4 -5 38
(b) (i) State Gauss’s law and express this law in both integral and
differential forms (no derivation). Show that Gauss’s law and
Laplace-Poisson’s equations are just the mathematical expressions
for the same.
(ii) A charge of 1 uC is placed at the centre of a hollow cube. Calculate
the electric flux diverging through each face. 7+3
(c) A plane electromagnetic wave propagating in x-direction has a
wavelength of 5:0 mm. The electric field is in y-direction and its
maximum magnitude is 30 V/m. Write suitable equations for electric and
magnetic fields as a function of x and t. 10
(a) (i) Qualitatively discuss ground wave propagation with reference to :
I. _ Electrical properties of surfaces
Il. Flat earth
II. Curved earth
(ii) What are the errors in Global Positioning Systems (GPS) ? 743
Q7. (a) Find the Laurent series for the function e”? in the range
0< |z|<~.
Using this expansion, show that for n= 0, 1, 2, 3, ...
1 1
< | exp (cos 6) cos (sin © —n6) 40 = = 10
3 !
0
SDT-F-GPH 4

(b) State Biot-Savart law and Ampere’s law. Calculate the magnetic
induction at a distance ‘d’ from an infinitely long straight wire in which
a current T’ flows using (i) Biot-Savart law, and (ii) Ampere’s law. 10
(c) An observer is 18m away from a light source (of dimension much
smaller than 1-8 m) whose power output P is 250 W. Calculate RMS
value of electric and magnetic fields at the position of observer. Assume
that the source radiates uniformly in all directions. 10
Q8. (a) (i) ‘Taking generating function of the Bessel differential equation as
> h®J,(x) = exp [ia - wy].
nove
Show that :
Leos x=Jo{x) #2) CDSoq(x)
n=l
W. sinx=2 )7 CY"Joq,1(8)
n=0 .
(ii) Plot the Bessel polynomials Jo(x) and J;(x) as the function of x. 842
(b) (i) Within mathematical framework, discuss magnetic vector
potential and magnetic scalar potential. Why are they called so ?
(ii) Show that magnetic induction is given by the curl of magnetic
vector potential.
(iii) What are Lienard-Wiechert potentials of a moving charge (no
derivations) ? 34443
(©) (i) Discuss the relative merits of Low Frequency (LF) and Very Low
Frequency (VLF) wave propagation.
(ii) Discuss the working principle of satellite navigation system and
mention its applications. 545,
Q9. (a) Solve the initial value problem
vu’ =—2tu? u(0) =1
with h = 0-2 on the interval (0, 0-4] by using Runge-Kutta method. 10
SDT-F-GPH 5

(b) (i) Prove that three-dimensional volume element ‘dx dy dz’ is not
invariant but four-dimensional volume element is invariant under
Lorentz transformation.
27>
(ii) Establish relativistic invariance of E . B . 446
(c) Find the energy stored in a 60 cm length of laser beam operating at
4mW. 10
Q10. (a) Determine Laplace transform of f{t) = et + sin 4t. 10
(b) What is a Poynting vector ? Derive expression for energy density, and
intensity of electromagnetic field in terms of parameters of electric and
magnetic field components of EM wave. Express the Poynting vectors in
terms of power. 10
(c) (i) Justify the importance of ionosphere in atmospheric science.
Discuss different layers and ionospheric parameters.
(ii) What are the characteristic features of troposphere ? 743
SDT-F-GPH 6