Cambie: Sc sn ean, 20
HYDROGEOLOGY
ee
Question Paper Specific Instructions °

Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting
questions :
There are NINE questions divided under FIVE sections.
Candidate has to attempt FIVE questions in all.
The ONLY question in Section A is compulsory.
Out of the remaining EIGHT questions, the candidate has to attempt FOUR, choosing
ONE from each of the other Sections B, C, D and E.
The number of marks carried by a question part is indicated against it.
Symbols, abbreviations and notations have their usual standard meanings.
Neat sketches are to be drawn to illustrate answers, wherever required.
Wherever required, graphs/tables are to be drawn on the Question-cum-Answer Booklet
itself.
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck off, attempt of a
question shall be counted even if attempted partly.
Any page or portion of the page left blank in the Question-cum-Answer Booklet must be
clearly struck off.
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only.
HJL-O-HDLY 1

SECTION A
(Compulsory Section)
Ql. Write short notes on the following in not more than 5 sentences
each: 5x8=40
(a) Geologic Materials as Aquifers 5
(b) _ Isohyets 5
(©) _ Relationship between Porosity, Specific retention and Specific yield 5
(@ Residence Time of Groundwater 5
(e) Reynolds Number 5
() Groundwater Drawdown 5
(g) Direct Rotary Drilling 5
(h) Wenner Array in Resistivity Survey 5
HJI-O-HDLY 2

SECTION B
Attempt any one question.
Q2. (a) Derive Darcy’s equation for anisotropic materials. 15
(b) Groundwater flows through an aquifer of cross-section area 10,000 m2
and with a length of 1000 m. Hydraulic heads at the groundwater entry
and exit points in an aquifer are 250 m and 200 m respectively.
Groundwater from the aquifer discharges into a stream at a rate of
100 m*/day. Calculate the hydraulic conductivity of the aquifer. If the
effective porosity of the aquifer is 0-2, what is the linear groundwater
velocity ? 15
(©) _ Differentiate between Dispersion and Diffusion. 10
Q3. (a) _ Differentiate between Hydraulic conductivity and Permeability. 15
(b) An aquifer consisting of 400 m interbedded sandstone and shale has
60% sandstone. The sandstone and shale have hydraulic conductivity of
0-1m/s each and vertical hydraulic conductivity of 0-01 m/s each.
Calculate the ratio of equivalent horizontal hydraulic conductivity and
vertical hydraulic conductivity of the aquifer. 15
(©) If hydraulic conductivity and thickness of an aquifer are 0:5 cm/sec and
25 m respectively, what is the transmissivity of the aquifer ? 10
HJI-O-HDLY 3

SECTION C
Attempt any one question.
@4. (a) Derive Thiem’s method for steady-state flow in a confined aquifer. 15
(b) Discuss on well completion and development methods. 15
(c) What is base flow ? How is it estimated ? 10
Q5. (a) What is the difference between aquifer performance test and step
drawdown test for sustainable yield of tube-wells ? 15
(b) Explain the difference between the groundwater level fluctuation due to
evaporation and evapotranspiration. 16
(©) Define slug test. How is transmissivity of aquifer calculated by this
test ? 10
HJI-O-HDLY 4

SECTION D
Attempt any one question.
Q6. (a) Explain the technique to infer suitable sites for groundwater exploration
by using Resistivity meter. 15
(b) Explain borehole logging with special reference to Gamma logging in
groundwater exploration. 15
(©) Discuss the drilling methods for groundwater exploration in different
geological formations. 10
Q7. (a) What is DTH drilling for groundwater exploration ? 15
(b) Using hyperspectral sensor, how is it possible to infer groundwater
quality ? 15
(c) What is Proton Precession Magnetometer ? Discuss the functioning of
this instrument in groundwater exploration. 10
HJI-O-HDLY 5

SECTION E
Attempt any one question.
Qs. (a) What are the major chemical constituents of groundwater ? Discuss the
factors that may affect the composition of groundwater. 15
(b) What is Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) in groundwater ? Explain its
significance in determining the suitability of groundwater for drinking
purposes. 15
(ce) Express 23 mg/L sodium (Na) in mol/L (Atomic wt. of Na = 23). 10
Q9. (a) Discuss the use of Hydrogen and Oxygen isotopes in the study of
groundwater. 15
(b) What is Artificial groundwater recharge ? Discuss with suitable
illustration, Roof-Top Rainwater Harvesting System for recharging the
e groundwater. 15
(©) Calculate the total harvestable rainwater from a roof having an area of
40 m2, with total annual rainfall of 60 inches and runoff coefficient 0-9. 10
HJI-O-HDLY 6