COMBED GEO.SCENTST AUN) EL
GVP-F-HDY |
HYDROGEOLOGY
Time Allowed : Three Hours Maximum Marks : 200
Question Paper Specific Instructions
Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting
questions:
There are NINE questions divided under FIVE sections.
Candidate has to attempt FIVE questions in all.
The ONLY question in Section A is compulsory.
Out of the remaining EIGHT questions, the candidate has to attempt FOUR, choosing
ONE from each of the other Sections B, C, D and E.
The number of marks carried by a question /part is indicated against it.
Symbols, abbreviations and notations have their usual standard meanings.
Neat sketches are to be drawn to illustrate answers, wherever required.
Wherever required, graphs/tables are to be drawn on the Question-cum-Answer (QCA)
Booklet itself.
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck off, attempt of a
question shall be counted even if attempted partly.
Any page or portion of the page left blank in the Question-cum-Answer (QCA) Booklet must
be clearly struck off.
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only.
GVP-F-HDY 1

SECTION A
(Compulsory Section)
Ql. Write short notes on the following in not more than 5 sentences
each: 5x8=40
(a) Perched Aquifer 5
(b)  Hydrograph and its Uses 5
(c) Dispersion Coefficient 5
(@) Slug Tests and their Types 5
(e) Gaining and Losing Streams 5
() — Photolinear Features 5
(g)  Gravimeter and its Types 5
(h)  Darey 5
GVP-F-HDY 2

SECTION B
Attempt any one question.
Q2. (a) What are aquifers, aquitards and aquicludes ? Explain the types of
aquifers with suitable illustrations. Point out the differences of
hydraulic conductivities of various zones (layers) in those types. 15
(b) The water table was at an elevation of 82:00 m above mean sea level, at
a certain point in an unconfined aquifer of 4 km? area. Due to natural
recharge in a rainy period, its level became 83:60 m above mean sea
level. A volume of 3:0 billion litres of water was pumped out of the
aquifer reducing the water level to the elevation of 81:10 m above mean
sea level. Assuming that the water table in the entire aquifer will
respond in a similar way, estimate the following :
(i) The specific yield of the aquifer.
(ii) The volume of recharge during rainy period. 15
(©) What is meant by Water Table ? What are the uses of water level
measurements ? Explain the causes of Water Table fluctuations in
aquifers. 10
Q3. (a) What are equipotential lines ? How do they help in drawing flow nets ?
Give the significant uses of flownet analysis in groundwater studies. 15
(b) What is the main difference between Regular springs and Artesian
springs ? Explain the basic hydrogeological settings that are necessary
to have artesian wells, with a suitable diagram. 10
(c) | What are the major components of a Water Balance Equation ? How do
they help in evaluating the changes of groundwater storage, by using
specific components of input-output ? 15
GVP-F-HDY 3

SECTION C
Attempt any one question.
Q4. (a) Derive expressions for equivalent hydraulic conductivity of a stratified
aquifer, consisting of several homogeneous and isotropic horizontal
layers, for horizontal and vertical flow. 15
(b) Derive expressions for unsteady flow in a confined aquifer for
Cooper-Jacob method. What are the assumptions related to it ? Explain
steps involved to estimate the storage coefficient and transmitivity of
the aquifer. 10
(©) A sample of length 40 cm and a diameter 6 cm of a medium-grain sandy
formation having median grain size of 0:80 mm is tested using constant
head permeameter. Assuming that the hydraulic conductivity of the
sample is 12 m/day, estimate the maximum value of piezometric head
difference to be used in the test. (Given : 1 = 1-0 x 10 N.s/m”) 15
Q5. (a) Derive the general equation for unsteady flow condition. Show that for
homogeneous and isostatic aquifers, steady state flow follows the
Laplace equation. 15
(b) Derive expressions for steady radial flow to a fully penetrating well to an
unconfined aquifer being pumped at a constant rate. What will be the
expression for radius of influence in this case ? Use suitable sketches. 10
(© In a recovery test of a discharge well in a confined aquifer, after
90 minutes of stopping the pumping, residual drawdown was observed
as 25 cm in an observational well located at 20 m from the discharge
well. Assuming that the discharge well was pumped for a period of
12 hours at a constant rate of 1-5 million litres/day, estimate the
transmitivity of the aquifer. (Given : log 9 (2) = 0:30103;
log ,)(8) = 0-477121) 15
GVP-F-HDY 4

SECTION D
Attempt any one question.
Q6. (a) Give an account on the applications of remote sensing techniques in
identifying groundwater promising zones. 10
(b) Explain the basic principles of Electrical Resistivity Method for
groundwater exploration. Describe the field procedures and data
interpretation techniques of electrical profiling and sounding, with their
uses. 15
(©) Explain the basic principles of Seismic methods of prospecting. Describe
the instrumentation, field measurements and applications of the two
prevailing seismic methods. 15
Q7. (a) What is a Test Drilling ? What kinds of measurements are made during
the drilling process ? How do they help in understanding the subsurface
hydrogeological studies ? 10
(b) What is meant by Geophysical Well-logging ? Describe the types of
well-logging methods employed in groundwater exploration, with their
applications. 15
(©) What is Recovery Test ? What is Residual Drawdown ? Derive
expressions to estimate the transmitivity of the formation. Use suitable
sketch. 15
GVP-F-HDY 5

SECTION E
Attempt any one question.
Q8. (a) What are the factors that cause salinisation of groundwater ? Discuss
the salinity of groundwater in semi-arid regions of India. 15
(b) Describe the various methods of determining the age of groundwater. 15
(©) What are hydrochemical facies of groundwater ? Discuss the sequence of
hydrochemical evolution of groundwater. 10
Q9. (a) Discuss the concept of artificial aquifer creation and recharge by
injection method. 15
(b) How is the chemical data of groundwater represented graphically ? Add
a note on Piper's Trilinear diagram and its applications. 10
(©) Discuss the causes of groundwater pollution due to solid and liquid
waste disposal in urban areas and its remediation techniques. 15
GVP-F-HDY 6