LE.SASS EXAM-2022 ‘feria DETACHABLE
INDIAN ECONOMICS
QUESTION PAPER SPECIFIC INSTRUCTIONS
Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting questions.
There are SIXTEEN questions divided under THREE Sections.
The ONLY question in Section *A’ is compulsory.
In Section ‘B’, SIX out of NINE questions are to be attempted.
In Section *C’, FOUR out of SIX questions are to be attempted.
Candidates should attempt questions/parts as per the instructions given in the Sections.
‘The number of marks carried by a question/part is indicated against it.
Candidates are required to write clear, legible and concise answers and to adhere to word limits,
wherever indicated. Failure to adhere to word limits may be penalized.
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck off, attempt of a question
shall be counted even if attempted partly.
Any page or portion of the page left blank in the Question-cum-Answer (QCA) Booklet must
be clearly struck off.
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only.
1 GVP-F-IND

SECTION ‘A’
1. Answer all six parts from this section. Answer to each should be in about
100 words. 5x6=30
1a) Write down the key recommendations of the 15th Finance Commission of India.
5
1b) What are the basic approaches of financial sector reforms in India ? 5
1.) Discuss how e-NAM and derivatives market linkages can benefit farmers in India.
5
1.4) _ Discuss the role of Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) in India in the context of
inflation targeting. i
1.) Write down the main features of foreign trade policy (2015-20) of India. 5
1(f) Analyse the trends in ‘Fuel and Power’ inflation in India based on WPI. J
SECTION ‘B’

Answer any six questions from this section. Answer to each should be in about
200 words. 15x6=90
2s “India has a worse underemployment problem than unemployment.” Do you agree ?
Give reasons. 13
Es Analyse the performance of commodity futures markets in India. Critically evaluate
the working of Forward Markets Commission (FMC) in India. 15
4. Describe the measures taken by the Government of India to tackle the problem of
black money. To what extent these measures are successful in addressing the
problem ? 15
5. What is competition policy? Why do we need a national competition policy
(NCP) ? How does NCP affect economic growth in India ? 15
6. Discuss the opportunities and challenges of India’s insurance sector. How the
insurance sector reforms can resolve these challenges ? 15
oA Analyse the effects of tariff protections on domestic industries in India. Evaluate
India’s trade openness and tariff policy since the 1991 reforms. 15
8. Explain the rationale for various monetary policy measures undertaken by the RBI
during COVID-19 Pandemic in India. 15
9 How is core inflation different from CPI headline inflation ? What is the rationale in
measuring core inflation ? Explain. 15
10. ‘What is the Aspirational Districts Programme of the Government of India ? Discuss
how it is a manifestation of the inclusive development agenda. 15

GVP-F-IND i

SECTION ‘C’

‘Answer any four questions from this section. Answer to each should be in about

300 words. 20%4=80

11.(a) Differentiate between the strategies for self-reliance through protection and self-
reliance through globalisation. 10

11.(6) Evaluate Public Expenditure Management Policy as an instrument of fiscal reforms
in India. 10

12. What are the basic principles of fiscal management in India ? Discuss the role of
FRBM rules (2004) to improve the fiscal health at sub-national level. 20

13.(a) Critically examine whether growing population is the cause of poverty or poverty
is the main cause of population growth in India. 10

13.(b) Analyse the trend in consumption inequality in India since the early 1990s. 10
14. Examine the complementarity between technological change and institutional change
in enhancing agricultural growth in India. Suggest some measures for adoption of
technologies for sustainable farming system in India, 20

15. Discuss the characteristic features of internal migration in India. Explain how
urbanisation is linked with migration. What are the major determinants of rural to

urban migration in large agglomerations in India ? 20

16. Analyse the complementarity, difference and integration between Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI) and Foreign Portfolio Investment (FPI). “FDI is necessary but not
sufficient condition for economic growth in India”. Critically examine. 20

3 GVP-F-IND

Bess OO ee ie aS, oa ae
1086 it SONDRA MRS OS i204 finite: . Lindt omessy eae emmy
Bo ee. eee ee ee
2 0 Neate! sibel fe, mere n.i6 238 ipetahing! Sid atone ta
re tes = ae Be inion dine, got 6.5 edge OL CRORE gale a of
Hes OE pale anie abn oh ite. co eye aaa <cinh a tae:

ae Pbasisamiis |: 2golomi .ayno Grusrany ign geammmaese - eI
. Bgl Homo AOE eAmess it shioe wecaaue iL Bes hs: attantarig ee =

3 wor slg Ain hi coffin lama. sag) eprsegs Sel

fo ear eiiitp ahoitereogh soit oft Be aad oy boli aceon to

PES RR Sey co \ SO) 01 eaten de oe
Bet SEG gto, segiriot noisy, sie) bas vib trate Desi ea ee Be

bo sonthelcinbecastiaIO IT) siete 1 o's 1 RON OR Mien: ee

1% OSs et | ie 1D) Sitbel a: die. egigtit DombABtesitwe |
ee eee ee eee x Bee ee
ee ee ee eee

es eee Bote bor een AE Stas a ae
eo ae et Re OR er cd

oat = ae Jiao eo ee * ieee
ss ee a ee a8, tae ee ee Bae

a ee : eee ake