COS Gam pats
DO NOT OPEN THIS TEST BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO
T.B.C. : DFGT-F-HTE Test Booklet Series
Serial No. TEST BOOKLET
0201493 ENGLISH
Time Allowed : Two Hours Maximum Marks : 100
INSTRUCTIONS

1. IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK THAT THIS TEST BOOKLET DOES NOT HAVE ANY UNPRINTED OR TORN OR
MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST
BOOKLET.

2. Please note that it is the candidate’s responsibility to encode and fill in the Roll Number and
‘Test Booklet Series Code A, B, C or D carefully and without any omission or discrepancy at
the appropriate places in the OMR Answer Sheet. Any omission/discrepancy will render the
Answer Sheet liable for rejection.

3. You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test
Booklet in the Box provided alongside, DO NOT Lies Pee |
write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4. This Test Booklet contains 120 items (questions). Each item comprises four responses (answers).
You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case, you feel that
there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any
case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.

5. You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided. See directions
in the Answer Sheet.

6. All items carry equal marks.

7. Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet,
you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you with your
Admission Certificate.

8. After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has
concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take
away with you the Test Booklet.

9. Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.

10. Penalty for wrong Answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN
THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.

(i) There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which
a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that
question will be deducted as penalty.

(ii) If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one
of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that
question.

(iii) If a question is left blank i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty
for that question.

DO NOT OPEN THIS TEST BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO

FILL IN THE BLANK
Directions :
Each of the following sentences in this section has a blank space and four words or group
of words are given after the sentence. Select the word or group of words you consider the
most appropriate for the blank space and indicate your response on the Answer Sheet
accordingly.
1. How we to ageing is a 4. The football match had to be
choice we must make wisely. because of the weather.
(@) respond (a) called on
(0) absolve (b) called off
disch
 cchage (©) called out
@ overlook
(@) called over
2. Complementary medicine
fewer risks, since it is used along 5. Nobody believed Ram at first but he
with standard remedies, often to lessen to be right.
side-effects and enhance feelings of
well-being. (a) came out
(Sy areaots (®) cartied out
(b) releases
(©) worked out
© ejects
(@)tumed out
(@) carries
6. How are you ____in your new
3. Stress may ____ fertility in men job? Are you enjoying it?
and women,
(a) keeping on
(a) engage
(b) reduce (2) (gomgon
(© inject (©) getting on
(d) deduce (d)_ carrying on
DFGT-F-HTE ~ A 2

7. We live a tower block. Our % it was raining, he went out
apartment is on the fifteenth floor. without a raincoat.
(@) at (@) Even
(b) in (b) Since
(©) over (©) Unless
0): rabbove: (@) Although

8, You were going to apply for the job, ‘ ;
and then you decided not to. So what 1 eee Tay Dar no-parking zone,

? came D8:
(a) put you off (a) came up with
(b) put you out (b) got away with
(©) tumed you off (©) made off with
(@ tumed you away (@) got on with
SYNONYMS
Directions :

Each item in this section consists of a sentence with an underlined word followed by four
words/group of words. Select the option that is the nearest in meaning to the underlined
word and mark your response on your Answer Sheet accordingly.

11. A provocative message had been doing 12. The differences include increase in mean
rounds on social media to instigate the temperature and heavy precipitation in
mob against migrants. several regions. _
(a) dexterous (a) drought
(b) inflammatory (b) oasis
(©) valiant (0) rainfall
(@ prudent (@)_ snowing

3 A — DFGT-F-HTE

13. The portal will help victims and 17. For Gandhiji, India’s religious and

complainants to anonymously report linguistic diversity was an asset, not a
cyber crime. liability.
(a) incognito (a) obligation
(b) directly (b) advantage
(©) unfailingly (©) attribute
om ae (@) reinforcement

14. He is suffering from a terminal disease. HB ni palatal Hs dal

bh

(a) sublunary a tasers
(b) terrific

(b) inconsistent
(©) chronic

(). duplicitous
(@_ incurable

(@)_ insincere

15. Doctors are reluctant to take rural

postings despite big salary offers. 19. Mahesh is mostly prejudiced in his
political opinion.
(a) disinclined
(@)_ objectionable
(b) eager
redator
even (b) pr ry
@w an (©) jaundiced
(@_ intimate

16. The authorities have reprimanded the
subordinate officer for violating the : .
protocol. 20. Do not indulge in tautology.
(a) extolled (a) truth telling
(b) purported (b)_prolixity
(c) admonished (©) foretelling
(@) required an apology (d) telepathic conversation

DFGT-F-HTE - A 4

ANTONYMS
Directions :
Each item in this section consists of a sentence with an underlined word followed by four
words, Select the option that is opposite in meaning to the underlined word and mark your
response on your Answer Sheet accordingly.
21. His religious views are rather fanatical. 24, Some of the men are highly misanthropic.
(a) bigoted (a) anti-social
©) (b) philosophic
(©) moderate
(©) atrophic
(@)_ militant
(@ philanthropic
22. Religious fundamentalists often consider
the followers of other religions to be 5, "Tha Gaanacwaaia weep pe IOaAA daa
heretics. ——
(a) dissenter @) sincere
(b) believer (b) erudite
(c) renegade (©) scholarly
(a) apostate a) Beaten
23. According to G B Shaw, men have . or
become inert. Therefore, life force has 26. His hand-writing is readable.
chosen women to perform its functions.
(a) well-written
(a) lively
decipherabl
(b) quiescent Ws eapheraie
(serra: (©) illegible
(@) apathetic (@) comprehensible
5 A — DFGT-F-HTE

27. Mohan is his steadfast friend. 29, The thief had very vital information to
pass on to the police.
(a) committed
(a) crucial
unwaverin

® ci ()  inessential
(6), :umtaltering (©) indispensable
(@)_ unreliable we ssi

28. = often goes tempestuous while 30. His lectures are often wordy and

jebating, pointless. er
(@) calm (a) diffuse
(6) violent (6) concise
(©) fierce (©) garrulous
(4) vehement (@ voluble
ORDERING OF WORDS IN A SENTENCE
Directions :

Each of the following items in this section consists of a sentence, the parts of which have
been jumbled. These parts have been labelled as P, Q, R and S. Given below each sentence
are four sequences namely (a), (b), (c) and (d). You are required to re-arrange the jumbled
parts of the sentence and mark your response accordingly.

31, the prize money for refusing her Pepsico was ordered _to compensate the woman

P Q R Ss
@ RSQP
(b+) SPQR _
(© RPSQ
@ QRSP
DFGT-F-HTE - A 6

32, trade operating fromacolony heldameeting demanding a probe into the illegal drug
d Q R
the residents of the city
s
(a) QRSP
(b).SPQR
(© SQRP
(@) RSQP
433, the university authorities cancelled the ongoing students’ union election and
?
following students’ unrest on campus closed till further orders declared the institution
Q R Ss
(a) ORSP
(&) QPSR
(©) SQRP
@ RSQP
34, brushed past the latter’s pet dog stabbed to death by aman _after his vehicle accidentally
P Q R
a cargo van driver was allegedly
§
(2) QRSP
(b+) QPSR
(©) SQRP
(d) SQPR
7 A — DFGT-F-HTE

35, anearthquake and tsunami the disaster mitigation agency said that the death toll from
P Q R
in Indonesia has crossed 1500
Ss
(@) PQSR
(b) RPSQ
(© SQRP
@ QRPS
36, Scientists say they have developed a new _ illnesses such as heart disease and cancer
B Q
DNA tool that usés machine learning to accurately
R
predict people’s height and assess their risk for serious
s
(a) PRSQ
(&) RPSQ
(© PSRQ
@ QRPS
37, tare evergreen tree in the Southern Western Ghats _ researchers have found that
5 Q
common white-footed ants are the best pollinators of
R
bees might be the best known pollinators but
s
@ PRSQ
(&) SQRP
(©) QSRP
@ PQRS
DFGT-F-HTE - A 8

38, Say from their forties onwards _ it is thus a good idea
P Q
and continue to exercise early enough _ for senior citizens to start
R s
() PRSQ
(b+) QRSP
(©) QSRP
(d) PQRS
39, Scientists have determined injury in animals and humans
P Q
that is linked to the severity of spinal cord a gene signature
R s
(@) PSRQ
(&) QRPS
(©) QSPR
@ PQRS
40, like amuscle and repeating the process and stable reading circuit
P Q
helps the child build a strong the brain works
R s
(a) QSRP
(b) SPRQ
© QSPR
@ RQPS
9 A — DFGT-F-HTE

ORDERING OF SENTENCES
Directions :
In this section each item consists of six sentences of a passage. The first and sixth sentences
are given in the beginning as $1 and S6. The middle four sentences in each have been
jumbled up and labelled as P, Q, R and S. You are required to find the proper sequence of
the four sentences and mark your response accordingly on the Answer Sheet.

41. S1: He no longer dreamed of storms, 42. S1: We do not know, after 60 years of
nor of women, nor of great occur- education, how to protect ourselves
rences, nor of great fish, nor fights, against epidemics like cholera and
nor contests of strength, nor of his plague.
wife.

S86: This is the disastrous result of
S6: He urinated outside the shack and = pie, under which we are
then went up the road to wake the nial
boy. P : If our doctors could have started
learning medicine at an earlier age,
P : He never dreamed about the boy. they would not make such a poor
show as they do.
Q : He only dreamed of places and of ;
vile escent hae beaedt ie Q : I have seen hundreds of homes. I
cannot say that I have found any
evidence in them of knowledge of
R : He simply woke, looked out through hygiene.
the open door at the moon and
unrolled his trousers and put them R : I consider it a very serious blot on
on. the state of our education that our
doctors have not found it possible
S ‘: They played like young cats in the to eradicate these diseases.
a he loved teen at be Joved S : I have the greatest doubt whether
Be our graduates know what one
should do in case one is bitten by a
The correct sequence should be snake,
@ ROPS The correct sequence should be
@ RQSP
(&) SRQP
(b+) PRQS
PR
ees: © QRPS
@ PRSQ @ PQSR
DFGT-F-HTE ~ A 10

43. S1: The weak have no place here, in 44. S1: The Nobel Prize for Economics in
this life or in any other life. Weak- 2018 was awarded to Paul Romer
ness leads to slavery. and William Nordhaus for their

work in two separate areas : econo-
mic growth and environmental

86: This is the great fact : strength is economics respectively.
life, weakness is death. Strength is
felicity, life etemal, immortal;
weakness is constant strain and 86: Among recent winners of Nobel
misery: weakness is death. Prize in Feanomics, it’s hard to

think of one issue which is more
topical and relevant to India.

P : They dare not approach us, they
have no power to get a hold on us,
sual ‘the rind 46; weakened. P : But there is a common thread in

their work.

Q : Weakness leads to all kinds of . a
aadecly, pliycal and srettals Wes Q = In economic jargon it’s termed as
ness is death. estemality:

R : But they cannot harm us unless we R: be luctive activity often has
bese Sak, AAI the hod is spillovers, meaning that it can
ready and predisposed to receive impact an unrelated party.
them.

S_: Romer and Nordhaus both studied
: the impact of externalities and came

& ener eet alpaca up with profound insights and
ie oe on ie economic models.

Mhescoenpctseequence:should: be The correct sequence should be

@ PQRS @) PQRS

&) PRQS (6) PRQS

(© QRSP (©) QSPR

(@) QSRP @ QSRP

1" A - DFGE-F-HTE

45. S1: India’s museums tend to be dreary S6: The fact that these two peace
experiences. laureates come from two different

nations underlines that this problem

7 has been widespread, from Rwanda

S6: Because it’s better to attract crowds to Myanmar,
than dust.

P + Even ‘the Douvre ‘that attracted att P : This year's Nobel peace prize has
eye-popping 8:1 million visitors last been awarded to two exceptional
year, compare. in India’s 1618 individuals for their fight to end the
million foreign tourists, has hooked - of sexual violence as a weapon
up with Beyonce and Jay-Z for Shwae
promotion, where they take a selfie
with Mona Lisa, . ;

Q : Denis Mukwege is a doctor who
has spent decades treating rape

Q : Our museums need to get cool too. survivors in the Democratic

Republic of Congo, where a long
5 civil war has repeatedly witnessed

R: A change of approach is clearly ‘dieftiocroriof-niaestrapse:
called for.

S : Troops of restless schoolchildren Rio Nadis: Miwad, 1s-Besselfrsigucvivor
are often the most frequent visitors, A sexual war crimes, perpetuated
endlessly being told to lower their y IS against the Yazidis.
voices and not touch the art.

S : Today she campaigns tirelessly to

The correct sequence should be put those IS leaders in the dock in

international courts.

(a) PQRS

The correct sequence should be

(bt) PRSQ +

@) PQRS
(© SRPQ
PRQS
@ QSRP @ FRO
(© SRQP
46. SI: A decade ago UN recognised that
rape can constitute a war crime and
a constitutive act of genocide. @ QRSP
DFGT-F-HTE - A 2

47. S1: Few scientists manage to break 48. S1: The climate question presents a
down the walls of the so-called leapfrog era for India’s develop-
ivory tower of academia and touch ment paradigm.
and inspire people who may not
otherwise be interested in science. $6: This presents a good template for

India, building on its existing plans
_ to introduce electric mobility
6: Not many would have survived this,
let alone excelled in the manner he Mong uses: Zing, and open by
; 2030.
did.
: P : It is aimed at achieving a shift to
P : Stephen Hawking was one of these sustainable fuels, getting cities to
few. commit to eco-friendly mobility
and delivering more walkable
0 os . ities, all of which will
Q : Around this time he was diagnosed ne ‘
eich: Amaychrophis Tsteeal SSG, improve the quality of urban life.
an incurable motor neuron disease,
sai given, taen:-sonee fe: live; Q: At the Bonn conference, a new
Transport Decarbonisation Alliance
has been declared.
R : Judging by the odds he faced as a
young graduate student of physics R : This has to be resolutel m1
: rea : é ly pursued,
at Cambridge University, nothing breaking down the barriers to wider
could have been a more remote adoption of rooftop solar energy at
possibility. every level and implementing net
metering systems for all categories
S_: When he was about 20 years old, he of consumers.
got the shattering news that he
could not work with the great Fred S : Already, the country has chalked
Hoyle for his PhD, as he had out an ambitious policy on
aspired to. renewable energy, hoping to
generate 175 gigawatts of power
from n sources by 2022.
‘The correct sequence should be a 4
‘The correct sequence should be
@ PQSR
@ SRQP
(b) PRQS
(b) SPRQ
© SRPQ © PRSQ
@) PRSQ (@) QRSP
13 A- DFGT-F-HTE

49. S1: The dawn of the information age 50. Sl: Ina globalised world, no country
opened up great opportunities for can hope to impose tariffs without
the beneficial use of data. affecting its own economic interests.

S6: To some, in this era of Big Data S6: The ongoing trade war also
analytics and automated, algorithm- threatens the rules-based -global
fai prokaming oF cated oF trade order which has managed to
information, the fear that their caieeely sols trace,» Cieparies
Ese arias ratonae between countries for decades.
may conjure up visions of a ; eee
dystopian world in which individual P: = bes ee ina asi which
liberties are compromised. ave Diatied eae « oftien Ge) the

ongoing trade war, are doing no
: Pies 5 good to their own economic

P : But it is the conflict between the Sinise wr SIGE a eee
massive scope for progress pro- partner tbe
vided by the digital era and the fear :
of loss of individual autonomy that eek :

. 4 : Apart from disadvantaging its
is foregrounded in any debates ccdniers;whaloell ever aiseay
about data protection laws. Inigheetaiveah dors cariazate goo

; tariffs will also disrupt the supply

Q:It also enhanced the perils of chain of producers who rely on
unregulated and arbitrary use of freien dnipare?
personal data.

R : China, which is fighting an econo-

R : It is against this backdrop that the mic slowdown, will be equally
White Paper made public to elicit affected,
views from the public on the shape
and substance of a comprehensive S : The minutes of the U.S. Federal
data protection law assumes signi- Reserve June policy meeting show
ficance. that economic uncertainty due to

the trade war is already affecting

S : Unauthorised leaks, hacking and private investment in the U.S., with
other cyber crimes have rendered many investors deciding to scale
data bases vulnerable. back or delay their investment

plans.

The correct sequence should be

The correct sequence should be
a) SQRP
ORS (@ SQPR
ores ) QPSR
() SRPQ () QRPS
@ QSPR @ PSRQ
DFGT-F-HTE ~ A 14

COMPREHENSION
Directions :
In this section you have few short passages. After each passage, you will find some items
based on the passage. First, read a passage and answer the items based on it. You are required
to select your answers based on the contents of the passage and opinion of the author only.
Passage — I
From 1600 to 1757 the East India Company's role in India was that of a trading corporation
which brought goods or precious metals into India and exchanged them for Indian goods like
textiles and spices, which it sold abroad. Its profits came primarily from the sale of Indian
goods abroad. Naturally, it tried constantly to open new markets for Indian goods in Britain
and other countries. Thereby, it increased the export of Indian manufacturers, and thus
encouraged their production. This is the reason why Indian rulers tolerated and even
encouraged the establishment of the Company’s factories in India. But, from the very
beginning, the British manufacturers were jealous of the popularity that India textiles enjoyed
in Britain, All of a sudden, dress fashions changed and light cotton textiles began to replace
the coarse woolens of the English. Before, the author of the famous novel, Robinson Crusoe,
complained that Indian cloth had “crept into our houses, our closets and bed chambers;
curtains, cushions, chairs, and at last beds themselves were nothing but calicos or India
stuffs”. The British manufacturers put pressure on their government to restrict and prohibit
the sale of Indian goods in England. By 1720, laws had been passed forbidding the wear or
use of printed or dyed cotton cloth. In 1760 a lady had to pay a fine of 200 for possessing
an imported handkerchief ! Moreover, heavy duties were imposed on the import of plain
cloth. Other European countries, except Holland, also either prohibited the import of Indian
cloth or imposed heavy import duties. In spite of these laws, however, Indian silk and cotton
textiles still held their own in foreign markets, until the middle of the eighteenth century
when the English textile industry began to develop on the basis of new and advanced
technology.
51. The East India Company was encour- 52. The people of England used Indian
aging the export of Indian manufacturers cloths because
because
(a) it was a philanthropic trading (a) they loved foreign and imported
corporation clothes
(b) it wanted Indian manufacturers to . - "
TRORDee Hild andl occas (b) the Indian textile was light cotton
(©) it profited fromthe sale af Indian, (©) the Indian cloths were cheaper
goods in foreign markets
(@)_it feared Indian Kings who would (a) the Indian cloths could be easily
not permit them trade in India transported
15 A- DFGT-F-HTE

53. What did the British’ manufacturer do to (a) The archival source

compete with the Indian manufacturers ?
(a) They pressurized the government to Ue), Te means ase

eae aa SH SOI cE (©. The Journalistic source
(b) They pressurized the government to (a) The literary source

levy heavy’ duties on import of

Indian clothes 55: “New. and “advanced technology” in the
(©) They requested people to change paragraph refers to

their fashion preferences

(a) the French Revolution

(d) They lowered the prices of the

Britain made textile (b) the Glorious Revolution of England

54, Which source is cited by the author to (c)_ the Industrial Revolution
argue that Indian textile was in huge
demand in 18th century England ? (d)_ the beginning of colonialism
Passage — I
Zimbabwe's prolonged political crisis reached the boiling point earlier this month when
President Robert Mugabe dismissed the Vice-President, Emmerson Mnangagwa. A battle to
succeed the 93-year-old liberation hero-tumned President had already been brewing within the
ruling Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front (Zanu-PF), with the old guard
backing Mr. Mnangagwa, himself a freedom fighter, and ‘Generation 40°, a grouping of
younger leaders supporting Mr. Mugabe’s 52-year-old wife, Grace. Ms. Mugabe, known for
her extravagant lifestyle and interfering ways, has been vocal in recent months about her
political ambitions. Mr. Mugabe was seen to have endorsed her when on November 6 he
dismissed Mr. Mnangagwa. But Mr. Mugabe, who has ruled Zimbabwe since its
independence in 1980, erred on two counts: he underestimated the deep connections
Mr. Mnangagwa has within the establishment and overestimated his own power in a system
he has helped shape. In the good old days, Mr. Mugabe was able to rule with an iron grip.
But those days are gone. Age and health problems have weakened his hold on power, while
there is a groundswell of anger among the public over economic mismanagement. So when
he turned against a man long seen by the establishment as his successor, Mr. Mugabe left
little doubt that he was acting from a position of political weakness. This gave the security
forces the confidence to turn against him and make it clear they didn’t want a Mugabe
dynasty. The military doesn’t want to call its action a coup d’etat, for obvious reasons. A coup
would attract international condemnation, even sanctions. But it is certain that the army chief,
Gen. Constantino Chiwenga, is in charge. His plan, as it emerges, is to force Mr. Mugabe to
resign and install a transitional government, perhaps under Mr. Mnangagwa, until elections
are held.
DFGT-F-HTE — A 16

56. In the paragraph, who has been called (©)_he suffered from health issues
liberation hero ?
(@)_ he dismissed Mr. Mnangagwa
(@) Constantino Chiwenga
59, The security forces of Zimbabwe staged
(b) Emmerson Mnangagwa a coup against the President because
(©) Robert Mugabe (@) they wanted Mrs. Mugabe as the
President
(d) Army Chief
oe Spey ete (b) they were aware of Mugabe’s
failing wealth
57. Mrs, Mugabe is supported by
(©) they disliked Mugabe's extravagant
(@ Mr. Mnangagwa ee
(d) they did not want a Mugabe dynast
(0) Mr. Mugabe @ gabe dynasty
(©. Geieeen 40 60. Why does the military not want to call it
a coup d'etat ?
@) Zanu-PF (@) Because coup is immoral :
58. Mr. Mugabe’s political weakness became (b). Because} coup ‘is illegal
apparent "when. (©) Because coup would lead to inter-
national censure and sanctions
(a) he endorsed his wife
(@) Because it would make the public
() he tuned against the army revolt
Passage — III
Over-eating is one of the most wonderful practices among those who think that they can
afford it. In fact, authorities say that nearly all who can get as much as they desire, over-cat
to their disadvantage. This class of people could save a great more food than they can save
by missing one meal per week and at the same time they could improve their health. A heavy
meal at night, the so-called “dinner”, is the fashion with many and often is taken shortly
before retiring. It is unnecessary and could be forgone, not only once a week but daily
without loss of strength. From three to five hours are needed to digest food. While sleeping,
this food not being required to give energy for work, is in many cases converted into excess
fat, giving rise to over-weight. The evening meal should be light, taken three or four hours
before retiring. This prevents over-eating, conserves energy and reduces the cost of food.
: 17 A - DFGE-F-HTE

61. Why should those who over-eat refrain 64. What is the most appropriate time for
from doing so ? having evening meal ?
(a) Because over-eating leads to loss of (a) An hour after the sunset
wealth
(b) Three or four hours before sleeping
(b) Because over-eating is bad for
health
(©) Before the sunset
(©) Because over-eating conserves food
(d)_ Just before sleeping
(d) Because over-eating is immoral and
unhealthy 5
65. According to the passage, how many
times a day should we have food ?
62. Over-eating is more prevalent among
(a) Three times
(a) the rich
(b) Two times
(b) the poor
(©) Once
(©) everybody
(a) Has not been specified
(@) the bourgeoisie
66. According to the passage, people over-
63. The writer is asking the readers cat
(a) to skip the heavy dinner and take (a) because they can afford to
light evening meal instead
(b) because they are hungry
(b) to stop eating anything at night
(©) because they have to work more
(©) to take food only during the day
i (d) because they have to conserve
(d)_ to eat food before the sunset energy
DFGT-F-HTE — A 18

Passage — IV
Much has been said of the common ground of religious unity. I am not going just now to
venture my own theory. But if anyone here hopes that this unity will come by the triumph
of any one of the religions and the destruction of the others, to him I say, “Brother, yours
is an impossible hope.” Do I wish that the Christian would become Hindu? God forbid. Do
I wish that the Hindu or Buddhist would become Christian? God forbid.
‘The seed is put in the ground, and earth and air and water are placed around it. Does the seed
become the earth, or the air, or the water ? No. It becomes a plant. It develops after the law
of its own growth, assimilates the air, the earth, and the water, converts them into plant
substance, and grows into a plant.
Similar is the case with religion. The Christian is not to become a Hindu or a Buddhist, nor
a Hindu or a Buddhist to become a Christian. But each must assimilate the spirit of the others
and yet preserve his individuality and grow according to his own law of growth.
If the Parliament of Religions has shown anything to the world, it is this : it has proved to
the world that holiness, purity and charity are not the exclusive possessions of any church in
the world, and that every system has produced men and women of the most exalted character.
In the face of this evidence, if anybody dreams of the exclusive survival of his own religion
and the destruction of the others, I pity him from the bottom of my heart, and point out to
him that upon the banner of every religion will soon be written in spite of resistance : “Help
and not fight,” “Assimilation and not Destruction,” “Harmony and Peace and not
Dissension.”
67. According to the author of the passage, 69. What does the author think about those
people should who dream about the exclusive survival
sey of their own religions and the
(@) change their religions destruction of the others ?
(b) follow their religions and persuade (@) He hates them
others to follow it (b) He desires to imprison them
(©) follow their own religions and (©) He pities them
yeepost oshen religions (® He praises them
disrespect other religi
AG) Slerpepect ciienreligions 70. According to the passage, what is
io “impossible hope” ?
68, ‘The Parliament of Religions is
(a) One day, all the people of the world
(@) a Christian organization will follow only one religion
G) a Budlilte scuciestion: (b) One day, there will be no religion
A ar: (©). Purity and charity are the exclusive
(©) a Hindu organization eenetoae
(@ a platform for discussion about (@ Banner of every religion will soon
every religion of the world be written
19 A-— DFGT-F-HTE:.

SPOTTING ERRORS
Directions :
Each item in this section has a sentence with three underlined parts labelled as (a), (b)
and (c). Read each sentence to find out whether there is any error in any underlined part
and indicate your response on the Answer Sheet against the corresponding letter i.e.,
(a) or (b) or (c). If you find no error, your response should be indicated as (4).
71, Except for few days ina year during the monsoon the river cannot flow on its own.
(a) (b) ©
No error.
(d)
72, Being apprised with our approach, the whole neighbourhood
(a) (b)
came out to meet the minister. No error.
© @)
73, The celebrated grammarian Patanjali was a contemporary to Pushyamitra Sunga.
(a) ) ©
No error.
(d)
74, His appeal for funds met a poor response. No error.
(a) (b) © (a)
75, Buddhism teaches that freedom from desires will lead to escape suffering. No error.
(a) (b) (©) (4)
76, This hardly won liberty was not to be lightly abandoned. No error.
(a) (b). () (4)
DFGT-F-HTE ~ A 20

77, My friend said he never remembered _having read a more enjoyable book. No error.
(a) (b) (©) (4)
7g, With a population of over one billion, India is second most populous country
(a) (b)
in the world after China. No error.
© (a)
79, There are hundred of superstitions which survive _ in the various parts of the country.
(a) (b) (©)
No error.
(@)

g0, Itis in the temperate countries of northern Europe

@) (b)

that the beneficial effects of cold is most manifest. No error.

(©) (d@)
g1, The effects of female employment on gender equality
(@) ()
now appear to be trickling at the next generation. No error.
(©) (qd)
g2, Since the 15 minutes that she drives, she confesses that she feels like
(a) . (b)
a woman with wings. No error.
(©) (a)
3, India won by an innings and three runs. No error.
(a) (b) (ce) (d)
an A- DFGT-F-HTE

g4, Eachone ofthese chairs are broken. No error.
(a) (b) (©) (@)
gs, Fewereature outwit the fox in Aesop’s Fables. No error.
(a) (b) ©) @)
36, Anywhere in the world when there is conflict women and children suffer the most.
@) (b) ©
No error.
(@)
g7, Themanis the foundational director of this company. No error.
(@) (b) © @)
,
gg, Patents of LGBT community members are coming in with a little help from NGOs.
@) ) ©
No error.
(@)
g9, Tolove one art formis great but to be able to appreciate another
(a) (b)
and find lateral connections are priceless. No error.
(©) @)
99, Female literacy rate has gone up by 11% _ in the past decade as opposed to
(a) (b)
a 3% increase in male literacy. _No error.
© (@)
DFGT-F-HTE - A 2

CLOZE COMPREHENSION
Directions :
Each of the following sentences in this section has a blank space with four words or group
of words given. Select whichever word or group of words you consider most appropriate for
the blank space and indicate your response on the Answer Sheet accordingly.
CLOZE COMPREHENSION - I
The question whether war is ever justified, and if so under what circumstances, is one which
has been forcing itself 91. (a) upon the attention of all thoughtful men.
(b) on
(© at
(@) over
On this question I find myself in the somewhat 92, (a) delightful position of
(b) painful
(©) pleasant L
(d)_ lovely
holding that no single one of the combatants is justified in the present war, while not taking the
extreme Tolstoyan view that war is under all circumstances a 93. (a) duty.
(b) obligation.
(c) responsibility.
(4) crime.
Opinions on such a subject as war are the outcome of 94. (a) feeling
(b) sentiment
(c) reason
(d)_ patriotism
rather than of thought: given a man’s emotional temperament, his convictions,
95. (a) however on war in general, and on any particular war which
(b) as well as
(c)_ both
(d) despite
may occur during his lifetime, can be 96. (a) thought with tolerable certainty.
(b) intimated
(c) suggested
(d) held
23 A- DFGT-F-HTE

The arguments used will be. mere reinforcements to convictions otherwise reached. The
fundamental facts in this as in all ethical 97. (a) questions are feelings; all that
(b) answers
(c) statements
(d)_ experiences
thought can do is to clarify and systematize the expression of those feelings, and it is such
clarifying and systematizing of my own feelings that I wish to 98. (a) engage
(b) praise
(c) attempt
(4) commend
in the present article. In fact, the question of rights and wrongs of a particular war is
generally 99. (a) considered from a juridical or quasi-juridical
(b) observed
(c) transferred
(a) opined
100. (a) possibility.
(b) formula.
(©) force.
(@)_ standpoint.
CLOZE COMPREHENSION - I
The Nobel Prize for Chemistry this year is a tribute to the power of
101. (a) evolution. The laureates harnessed evolution and used it in the
(b) devolution.
(c) revolution.
(d) involution.
102. (a) microscope with amazing results. Frances H. Amold, an American who
(b) field
(c)_ market
(d) laboratory ‘
‘was given one-half of the prize, used ‘directed evolution’ to 103. (a) inhibit
(b) synthesize
(c) hamper
(a) hold back
variants of naturally occurring enzymes that could be used to 104. (a) constitute
(b) sink
(c) manufacture
(a) resolve
DFGT-F-HTE — A 24

biofuels and pharmaceuticals. The other half went to George P. Smith, also of the U.S., and Sir
Gregory P. Winter, from the U:K., who evolved antibodies to 105. (a) . combat
() support
(©) observe
@) invite
autoimmune diseases and even metastatic cancer through a process called phage display.
IDIOMS AND PHRASES ;
Directions :
Given below are some idioms/phrases followed by four alternative meanings to each. Choose
the response (a), (b), (c) or (d) which is the most appropriate expression.
106, A match made in heaven 109. The jewel in the crown
(@) a marriage that is solemnized (a) someone who has many skills
‘ formally A
(b) something that one wants
(b) a marriage that is unsuccessful We) Be cont llr tlng Seu arco
(©) marriage that is likely to be happy of things ’
‘and successfill (a) the jewel in the crown of the king
(@ a marriage of convenience
110. To live in a fool's paradise
ay A esters valine (@) ‘to live a life that is dishonest
(a) someone who is very keen to ;
experience art and literature (b) to be happy because you will not
accept how bad a situation really is
to
) Lape wens te Gitiend (©) to believe that things you want will
happen
ic) peciapags spiesharnee GE ones (@) to enjoy yourself by spending a lot
of money
(@) someone who looks at her/his
culture critically 1k: A-Totten apple
fie kuabean wis (@ to remove something which is
bv Totten
to be nearly dead
® aaa (b) one bad person in a group of good
(b) to be deeply afraid of death people
(©) to beat someone to death (©) a loving and kind person
(qd) an action or event which causes (@ a disorganized person with bad
something to end or fail habits
25 A DFGL-F-HTE

112. To vote with your feet 117. Cook the books
(a) to show that you do not support (a) to record false information in the
something accounts of an organization
(b) to replace something important (b) to do something that spoils some-
(©) to change something you must do one’s plan
(@) to express a particular opinion (©) to tell a false story
113. Verbal diarrhoea (@) to be very angry
alkenes 118 Change your tune
(b) to talk too much
* ash vd (a) to listen to good music
(0) to be in a difficult situation
ds be ged Stain (b) . do things that you are not willing
114, To sail close to the wind (©) to change your opinion completely
(ah dorado betachiciiina thatiypn because it will bring you an advan-
| are not tage
(b) to be in some unpleasant situation (d) to pretend to be very friendly
©) to be destroyed by a belief
© ides 119. Blue-blood
(d) to do something that is dangerous
(@)_ to swallow poison
Risk Arooabls entence (b) to be overly interested in someone
(a) to look at someone or something .
twice (©) to suddenly become jealous
(b) a situation in which you cannot (@) to belong to a family of the highest
succeed social class
(c) a word which has two meanings
d 120. Cut the crap
(@) something that causes both advan- aaT ye
tages and problems (@ an impolite way of telling someone
to stop saying things that are not
116. To cut your own throat true
(a) to stop doing something (b) to stop needing someone else to
(b) to do something because you are look after you
eas (©) to talk about something important
! ,
(2) ido beteaver Ania ze Ned sane (d) to upset someone by criticizing
(@ to allow someone to do something them
DFGT-F-HTE ~ A 26

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
27 A — DFGT-F-HTE

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
DFGT-F-HTE - A 28

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
29 A-— DFGT-F-HTE

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
DFGT-F-HTE — A 30

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
w A — DFGT-F-HTE

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
DFGT-F-HTE — A 32