AN {TT 9)
CDS EXAWi (1),2021
agen e808 ee
‘DO NOT OPEN THIS TEST BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO
T.B.C. : NYRG-F-ENG Test Booklet Series
— TEST BOOKLET
0228461 ENGLISH
Time Allowed : Two Hours Maximum Marks : 100
INSTRUCTIONS

1. IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK THAT THIS TEST BOOKLET DOES NOT HAVE ANY UNPRINTED OR TORN OR
MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST
BOOKLET.

2. PLEASE NOTE THAT IT IS THE CANDIDATE’S RESPONSIBILITY TO ENCODE
AND FILL IN THE ROLL NUMBER AND TEST BOOKLET SERIES CODE A, B, C OR D
(CAREFULLY AND WITHOUT ANY OMISSION OR DISCREPANCY AT THE APPROPRIATE
PLACES IN THE OMR ANSWER SHEET. ANY OMISSION/DISCREPANCY WILL
RENDER THE ANSWER SHEET LIABLE FOR REJECTION.

3. You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test
Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT
write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4. This Test Booklet contains 120 items (questions). Each item comprises four responses (answers).
You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case, you feel that
‘there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any
case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.

5. You have to mark your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided. See directions in
the Answer Sheet.

6. All items carry equal marks.

7. Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet,
you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you with your
Admission Certificate.

8. After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has
concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take
away with you the Test Booklet.

9. Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.

10. Penalty for wrong Answers :

THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE.

(i) There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a
wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that
question will be deducted as penalty.

(ji) If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as wrong answer even if one
of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that
question.

Gili) If a question is left blank i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty
for that question.

DO NOT OPEN THIS TEST BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO

COMPLETION OF SENTENCE
Directions : The following items have one part of the sentence followed by. four
alternatives. Complete the sentences by choosing the correct alternative.
1. I asked two people the way to the (©) either of them
ser (@) all of them
(a) but neither of them could help me
(b)_ however none of them could show 6. The bus service is very good; there is a
me the way bus
(©) yet they had doubts about the (a) after ten minutes
station (b) in ten minutes
(@) nevertheless they couldn’t guide (©) before ten minutes
ue (@. every ten minutes
2. The room was very warm : = bat
(@) becatise. the AC was’ set “to 1. a live near a busy airport; the planes
moderate temperature 2
(b) though the AC was set to very (@) near our house
cold (&) by our house
(©) since the AC was not very warm (©) over our house
in its temperature setting (@ around our house
(@) since the AC was in a very low
temperature setting 8. Dan was very quiet. He didn’t say a
word
3. We could leave’ today or we could (Galt ine eat
leave tomorrow % A
(b) the entire evening
(@) preferring what you want meet :
(b) as you prefer one of the two OB edie oua:
(©) depending on what you prefer (@) entire evening
Cr PRES Tecr ony cea 9. 1 don’t like stories
4. Mohan and I couldn’t get into the (a) which can have unhappy endings
house because (b) which had sad endings
(a) neither of us had the keys (©) that have-unheppy endings
(b) both of us do not have the keys (@) whi sas cele eas
(©) either of us did not have the keys
(@) neither of us did have the keys 10. Not everything
5. There are many good hotels, you can (Ce) /thatihiappened was-say, faut
choose to stay () which happen was my fault
(a) many of them (©) what happened was my fault
(b) any one of them (4) whatever happened was my fault
NYRG-F-ENG ~ A 2

e Se
COMPREHENSION
Directions : In this section you have two short passages. After each passage, you will find
some items based on the passage. Read the passage and answer the items based on it.
Passage - I

As to happiness, I am not so sure. Birds, itis true, die of hunger in large numbers during
the winter, if they are not birds of passage. But during the summer they do not foresee
this ‘catastrophe, or remember how nearly it befell them in the previous winter. With
human beings the matter is otherwise. I doubt whether the percentage of birds that will
have died of hunger during the present winter (1946-47) is as great as the percentage of
human beings that will have died from this cause in India and central Europe during the
same period. But every human death by starvation is preceded by a long period of anxiety,
and surrounded by the corresponding anxiety of neighbours. We suffer not only the evils.
that actually befall us, but all those that our intelligence tells us we have reason to fear.
The curbing of impulses to which we are led by forethought averts physical disaster at the
cost of worry, and general lack of joy. I do not think that the leamed men of my
acquaintance, even when they enjoy a secure income, are as happy as the mice that eat
the crumbs from their tables while the erudite gentlemen snooze. In this respect, therefore,
Tam not convinced that there has been any progress at all.

U1. The birds die of hunger in winter (©) are not healthy
bee (@ worry too much about future
(@) they do not move to warmer

places 14. Which one of the following is the
(b) people do not feed them antonym of the word ‘erudite’ in the
(©) they do not get the food of their passage ?
choice (a) Qualified

(d) they are too young to get the food (0) Mleducated

12. The birds do not foresee the cata- (©) Logical
strophe because they (Lome
(a) cannot predict an accident
(b) overlook a difficult situation 15. Which one of the following is the
(©) cannot expect a sudden disaster central theme of the passage ?
@) ignore the problems (a) Life of the birds and the mice

13,: Homang, beitigs Moambotiebe happy () Starvation in India and central
because they JB be
(@) do not get time to enjoy (©) Progress of mankind
(6) worry too much about their work (Disasters in 1946-47

3 A — NYRG-F-ENG

Passage ~ Il
More than eight months after the national lockdown was announced in late March, urban
India is learning to live with the Covid-19 pandemic. In fact, indicating a positive outlook
for the future, many survey respondents in a recent survey say they plan to return to
pre-lockdown levels of shopping, personal grooming, going to cinemas and socializing as
pandemic fears continues to recede.
The survey findings highlight that the suppression of consumer demand because of fears
of job losses and salary cuts could be coming to an end. Increasingly, urban Indians are
showing increased confidence about the future of the economy. This could be an indicator
of the possible ‘pent-up demand’ that several economists have been talking about - a
demand that could be unleashed once a vaccine is developed and distributed, or when
there are signs of the pandemic’s spread reducing to negligible levels or vanishing totally.
Around 65 per cent of respondents said they had settled into new routines, or that they
saw signs of the situation improving, or they had come to terms with the pandemic and
were moving on with their lives. And since the survey was conducted before the news of
the successful trials of the Pfizer vaccine for the coronavirus was announced, it is likely
that the consumers are now even more positive in their outlook about the future.
16, The general tone of the passage is that (©) People are moving on with their
of lives
(a) Optimism (@) ‘Pent-up demand’
(b) Pessimism 19. What does the author mean by ‘pent-up
(©) Fatalism oun . ia
a (a) Desire (suppres: to spend
(W) Pos money once pandemic is con-
= trolled
17. The willingness of consumers to go : ;
back to normal lifestyle indicates their (b) Economic normalcy of consumers
ss (©) Flamboyant shopping by con-
(a) Casual attitude siman
(b) Change of moods (@) Criticism of the public on the
(©) Desire for future plans Pay-cuts
(@) Sense of economic security 20. What, according to the author, is the
reason behind suppression of consumer
18. Which statement in the passage/phrase demands ?
indicates that ‘Life must go on’ ? (© The lack of vaccine till date
(@) They settled into their new (b) Professional insecurity
routines (©) Motive to save up some money
(b) Salary cuts could be coming to an (@) Careful and calculative attitude of
end the general public
NYRG-F-ENG ~ A 4

SPOTTING ERRORS
Directions : Each item in this section has a sentence with three underlined parts labelled
as (a), (b) and (c). Read each sentence to find out whether there is any error in any
underlined part and indicate your response on the answer sheet against the corresponding
letter i.e., (a) or (b) or (c). If you find no error, your response should be indicated as (d).
21, Everything is going well; we didn’thave any problem. No error.
@ ©) © @
22, Lavanya hasn't gone to work yesterday. No error.
@ © © @
2B. Look! The boy over there wears the same sweater as you. No error.
@ ) Oo @
24, Itbegins to turn dark: shall I switch on the lights ? No error.
@ ©) © @ |
2s, Raman and Mitali have been married for twenty years. No error.
@ © © @
26, Thave played basketball for the past three hours. No error.
@ ® © @
27. Jamila had a book in front of her, but she didn’t read it. No error.
@ Oo) © @
2g, When she heard the news she hasn’t been very pleased. No error.
@ ) © @
29, Where are you coming from? Areyou an American? No error.
@ O) © @
39, Lwent to Canada a few years ago for aholiday. No error.
@ ) © @
5 A — NYRG-F-ENG

ORDERING OF WORDS IN A SENTENCE
Directions : Each of the following items in this section consists of a sentence, parts of
which have been jumbled. These parts have been labelled as P, Q, R and S. Given below
each sentence are four sequences, namely (a), (b), (c) and (d). You are required to
rearrange the jumbled parts of the sentence and mark your response accordingly.
31, from Europe to America in 1992 his first voyage Columbus made
P Q R $
(a) SPRQ
() SRPQ
© PRSQ
@ QRSP
32. scientists have the effects of warmed us about climate change
P Q R 6
(a) RPSQ
() RSPQ
© PRQS
@ QSPR
33. speed is a potent cause industrial growth ata terrific inabigcity of pollution
P Q R Ss
(@ RSQP
(b+) QPRS
© PRSQ
@ QPSR
NYRG-F-ENG - A 6

34. and garbage today our environment filth and squalor _is in constant grip of
P Q R Ss
(a) RPSQ
(b+) RSPQ
(© QSPR
@ QSRP
35. of corruption everywhere to ease out the monster _ it is the duty of the government
P Q R Ss
(@) SQRP
() QRSP
© PRSQ
@ QRPS
36. made the movement the poor visibility of the vehicles quite difficult
P Q R s
(@) QRPS
(&) RSPQ
© QRSP
@ QPRS
37. Mohan clearly Icouldn’t see only a few yards ahead though he was
P Q R Ss
(@ RQSP
(+) RSPQ
© PRSQ
@ SRQP
% A NYRG-F-ENG

38. both winter and summer extreme are truly here in India
P Q R s
(@) RPSQ
(b) SRQP
© SPRQ
@ PSRQ
39. getcrystallised the self and world view _and physical space where basic ideas of
P Q R
public culture is a mental
S
(@) RQPS
(b+) SRQP
(© SRPQ
@ QRSP
40. that he ordered the post was the first job he performed on reaching
P Q R
my release from jail
Ss
(a) RPSQ
() RSPQ
© PRSQ
@ RQPS
NYRG-F-ENG - A 8

IDIOMS AND PHRASES
Directions : Given below are some idioms/ phrases followed by four alternative meanings
to cach. Choose the most appropriate response from among (a), (b), (c) or (4), and mark
your response in the answer sheet accordingly.
41. Forty winks 44, Penny-wise and pound-foolish
(a) Winking forty times (a) Wise to spend each penny
carefully
ep disorders
Ap) isleee ioch (b) Careful about small amounts but
Giiiag aR careless about large amounts
? (©) People who don’t understand the
(a) A short sleep during the day importance of each penny
ig (A) Careful about large amounts but
42. Life in the raw careless about small amounts
(a) Life in its natural, unembellished
pee 45. Pin back your ears
(b) Life at its easiest (a) To listen carefully to something
; (6) Person or organisation that pins
(©) Life that is complex Booted issu
(@) A daredevil’s life (©) To keep yourself away from
hearing bad stuff
43. A paper tiger (@ To clean your ears with a pin
(@) A person or thing that appears
threatening but is ineffectual 46. Turncoat
(b) To threaten someone but do no o) Berechatales rig cost
aaa (b) Someone who deserts one group
: : to join another
(©) Environmental protection paper-
sone (©) A truly dishonest person
(@ To speak to people in a roaring (@) Going round and round in a court
voice of law
9 A-— NYRG-F-ENG

47. Say your piece 49. Under the table
(ey Seale Wik asi iste (@) Work under difficult circum-
stances
(b) Speak in a talkative manner O Mee
(©) Make your argument piece by (c) Working under furniture
piece
(@) Making or receiving payments
(@) Express your opinion surreptitiously
48, Top-notch 50, At the drop of a hat
(a) The highest marking on a tree or a (a) Clumsy person who drops hats
building everywhere
‘ 4
(b) Person or organization that attracts (Sadan and Sica ich
thought
only the top
(©) Do something without much
(©) Of highest possible quality ee
(@) Person of integrity (@) A happy and easygoing man
ORDERING OF SENTENCES
Directions : In this section each item consists of six sentences of a passage. The first and
sixth sentences are given in the beginning as $1 and $6. The middle four sentences in
each have been jumbled up and labelled as P, Q, R and S. You are required to find the
proper sequence of the four sentences and mark your response accordingly on the answer
sheet.
51. SI: An ideal citizen is one who estab- S : He loves his country so much so.
lishes his standard in everything.
$6: He can be called a thorough The eckress rem etcarsiinis be
gentleman. @ SROP
P : Because he is a true patriot.
Q : Also, he can lay down his life for @) RPQS
the honour of his country. OrRoING
R : That he can make any sacrifice for
his motherland, @ QRSP
NYRG-F-ENG ~ A 10

52. SI: There are multiple legal avenues R = In reality, unity and coherence,
for patients to indict doctors, but not length, constitute a real good
rarely is it the other way round. paragraph.

$6: It is clear that patients have S : Many people define paragraphs in
multiple avenues to pursue, should terms of their length.
they feel an injustice has been
perpetrated againat them. The correct sequence should be
P : An FIR can be lodged against () QPRS
them under the section 304A of
the Indian Penal Code. OS RORS
Q : A compensation case can be filed (hy
in a consumer forum. @ QRsP
R: For one occurrence, there are
multiple forums where doctors $4 SI: Then what is necessary with
have to defend themselves. regard to taming science and
technology is :
S : For Instance, a complaint can be
made to their employer. $6: Then why do we not tame atomic
energy to peaceful purposes ?
The correct sequence should be
P : We must have the basic know-
@ PQRS ledge of the two.
() PSRQ Q: It is said, ‘Science is a useful
servant but destructive master’,
() RSQP
R : By the misuse of science, mankind
@ SRQP id will meet its doom quite soon.
, res S = If we do not hamess it for the
el seer eens blest welfare of mankind, I am afraid, a
oe total annihilation is a must.
6: Understanding of these makes one
a good writer of para, j The correct sequence should be
P
P : A paragraph need not be pages Oso
together in length. (@) PQSR
Q : But actually a paragraph is a group (© RQSP
of at least five sentences on the
lower limit. @ QRSP
u A NYRG-F-ENG

55. S1: Uttarakhand is vulnerable to The correct sequence should be
disasters.
(a) PSQR
S6: The lack of ability to learn lessons
from disasters, and the lack of (b+) PQSR
any accountability, ensure the per-
petuation of the situation. © RPSQ
P : The absence of necessary moni- @ RSQP
toring, early warming systems and
the overall disaster management 57. $1: The river Ganga is very important
system add another layer of for us culturally, spiritually, eco-
damages during the disasters. logically as well as economically.
Q : Major interventions act as force S6: Journey in the right direction is
multipliers during such disasters. firmly making progress, gathering
R : The violation of legal and other Peon: Wrens &
prudent norms, further increases He een enreni
the damages. P It is rich in cultural heritage,
S : Climate change is increasing these natural splendour and biodiversity.
wwalzary ties) Q : People have used its water since
The correct sequence should be the beginning of civilisation for
different purposes.
(@) SQRP
R : Ithas most dense cultivation in its
(>) PQSR basin and is critical for ensuring
@rosee food and water security.
@ RPSQ S : We need to utilise its water for
different purposes while ensuring
s “ that its natural ecology is pro-
56. SI: Now only fifteen minutes were tectid actcie “Utteattires raed
left. forests along the river remain
S6: Our performance was excellent. rejuvenated.
P : Thank God, we rubbed the word The correct sequence should be
‘defeat’ writ large on our forehead. Groner
Q : It was a game of life and death.
() QSRP
R : Each one had concluded that we
were going to lose. (©) RSQP
S : It was a matter of minutes. @ PRQS
NYRG-F-ENG - A 2

58, S1: The Republic Day in India falls on R : Whatever leisure time you get,
26th January. you use that in creative activity.
(96¥- 11d sited tie intel at. S_: Hobby is a leisure time activity.
P : The President of India takes the ‘Tbe comeck sequence, shouldbe
salute,
@ PQRS
Q : It is organized at the India Gate. es
R : People from far and wide come to Bes ens
witness it.
" E @ RSQP
S : It is celebrated with great pomp
and show.
60, S1: Life in a village is ideal.
The correct sequence should be
$6: They can no longer be considered
(@ PRSQ ee
P : Our villages are no longer dirty.
() PQSR aie netas?
Q : Moreover, they are disease-free.
(© SRQP
R : Because, the village people are
@ RSQP well-educated now.
S = Rather, they are highly clean and
59, SI: Different people have different tidy.
hobbies.
The correct sequence should be
$6: With hobbies, you spend time in a
gainful way. (@) SRQP
P : Thus, they say, as many people, so () PSQR
many hobbies.
(© SRPQ
Q : In due course, that becomes your
hobby. @ RSQP
13 A - NYRG-F-ENG

FILL IN THE BLANKS

Directions : Each of the following sentences in this section has a blank space.and four
words or group of words aré given after the sentence, Select the most appropriate word
or group of words for the blank space and indicate your response on the answer sheet
accordingly.

61. Honesty is on his face. 66. Keep him arm’s length.
(a) wrote (a) at
(Oe (b) by
(©) writing (©) for
(d) writes (@) off

62. He lives his pen. 67. He succeeded .
(@) by (a) on himself
(b) with (b) by himself
(©) on (©) in the long run
@ off (d) on the long run

63, Much water has- run the 68. Have you ever tried a
bridge since then, coconut tree ?
(a) near (a) climbing
(b) about (b) to climbing
(© under (©) going on
(d) in (d) going up

64, The gun with a loud noise. 69. He is a man means.
(@)_ went on (a) for
(b) went off (b) in
(©) went about (©) of
(@ went around (@ above

65. They fought the last man in 70. He dislikes punish his
the army. friends.
(a) on (a) have to
(b) from (b) having to
(©) with (©) for
(d) to (d) regarding

NYRG-F-ENG ~ A 14

SYNONYMS
Directions : Each item in this section consists of a sentence with an underlined word
followed by four words. Select the option that is nearest in meaning to the underlined
word and mark your response on the answer sheet accordingly.
71. He drowned in the flood water last 76, He drank excessive amount of liquor.
Le (a) inculpable
a seared (b) inordinate
swam
bl
(© submerged i. bananas
( tou (@ innocuous
72 Auturm js rther'a dy season: 77. He initiated the dialogue. -
ia). ead (a) ordered
(b) humid (b) interfered
(©) rainy (©) began .
(@_ moist (@) planned i
73. Our differences are growing day by 78, She looked pale after recovering from
day. Covid-19.
(@) confabulations detain,
(b) interferences (0) naddy
(©) disagreements é
(@) discrepancies el itond
i
(@ radiant
74. The big tree hindered access of
sunlight into the house. 79. 1 overrule your proposal.
(a) impeded (a) wan
(b) shaded (b) veto
(©) facilitated (©) weaken
(@) poured (@) supersede
75. The complexity of the issue baffled 5 14. behaviour shocked me.
everyone. shocked
(@) conclusion (Qecii
(b) intricacy (b) pacified
(© grievance (©) appalled
(@) complacency (@ scintillated
15 A-NYRG-F-ENG

aes
| ANTONYMS
Directions : Each item in this section consists of sentences with an underlined word
followed by four words or group of words. Select the option that is opposite in meaning
to the underlined word and mark your response on the answer sheet accordingly.
81. I am very particular about it. 86. The police detained me today amidst
Que busy traffic.
(a) impeded
5
Wee (b) released
ekors (©) confined
@ minute @ held
Sz. He es Cem panicky’: 87. In my state of despair, I confessed
(@) stout everything.
(b) slim (a) despondency
Oa (b) determination
@ fit (©) dependant
(d) elation
83. This river originates from the Ganges.
onpinates from the Gangs 88. He was accused by the entire com-
(a) inaugurates _ munity after he failed in the mission.
(b) culminates (a) vindicated
(©) initiates (b) incriminated
(@)_ emanates (©) indicted
ace
84. The film I saw was hilarious. (@) arraigned
(© tragic 89. There was much to boast about the
: quality of his work.
(b) serious
y (a) bluster
(©) wproarious kes
Cc) jovial (©) deprecate
85. On that day, pandemonium reigned in @)_ flaunt
thera 90. He delivered an eccentric speech.
(a) hullaballoo (@) an odd
(b) uproar (b) a peculiar
(©) peace (©) a normal
(@) accolade (@)_ an jdiosyneratic
NYRG-F-ENG ~ A 16

PART OF SPEECH
Directions : Each of the following sentences has a word or phrase underlined. Read
the sentences carefully and find which part of speech the underlined word belongs to.
Indicate your response on the answer sheet accordingly.
91. They wandered around aimlessly. 96. Sit down and rest a while.
(a) Verb (a) Adverb
() Adjective (b) Adjective
(©) Intensifier (©) Intensifier
(@) Noun (® Noun
92. We went away after they had left. 97. Rakesh is too old to run fast.
(a) Pronoun (a) Adverb
(b) Adjective (b) Conjunction
(©) Intensifier (©) Intensifier.
(@) Conjunction Ory
: : ; ; 98. For the next generation of interior
opportunities are immense.
(a) Adverb (anes:
(b) Intensifier (b) Adjective
(©) Adjective ee
(@ Noun Clause @ Preaien
94. You are paying less attention to your 99. Life is a solo fight, and each person
studies these days. makes his or her own joumney.
(a) Adverb (®) Noun
(b) Adjective (b) Adjective
(©) Intensifier (6) interne
(@ Noun (@) Adverb
95. Why, is it really Sujata on the phone? 100. The cat loves comfort.
(a) Interjection (@) Indefinite article
(b) Adjective (b) Definite article
(©) Intensifier (©) Intensifier
(@ Noun (A) Subject
7 A — NYRG-F-ENG

CLOZE COMPOSITION
Directions : Each of the following sentences in this section has a blank space with four
words or group of words given. Select whichever word or group of words you consider
the most appropriate for the blank space and indicate your response on the answer sheet
accordingly.
The polythene bags 101. (a) are non-biodegradable, i., they cannot
(b) become
© is
(@) were
be decomposed 102. (a) by micro-organisms into manure. They
(b) through
(©) into
@ in
remain as 103. (a) theyare even after years. Animals that started
() itis
(©) even
@) after
eating waste food 104. (a) besides with these polythene bags, ultimately
(b) beside
(©) thorough
(@) along
started dying 105. (a) of their internal system was getting blocked.
(b) though
(©) because
(@) for
The Government had no alternative 106. (a) yet to ban these polythene
() but
(©) so
(@)_ because
NYRG-F-ENG - A 18

bags. It is 107. (a) butalso duty of the Government to look into this matter;
(b) still
(©) the
@) yet
however, it is also the duty of each individual to 108. (a) get it
(b) do it
(©) convene it
(@) see to it
that we 109. (a) didn’t use polythene bags. By using these we will
(b) weren't
(©) don’t
(@ aren't
not only harm the environment but ourselves as well. Thus, say ‘No’ to plastic bags and
contribute 110. (a) by society.
(b) to
(©) into
@ in
PREPOSITION AND DETERMINERS
Directions : Each of the following sentences in this section has a blank space with four
options. Select whichever preposition or determiner you consider the most appropriate for
the blank space and indicate your response on the answer sheet accordingly.
11. He succeeded dint of 112. Due to his illness, he could not finish
perseverance and hard work. the work time.
(@) by (a) by
(b) for (b) for
(©) on © on
(d)_ upon (@) upon
19 A-NYRG-F-ENG

113. There is no meaning what 117, Sit here me.
you say.
(a) by
Oe (b) beside
(&) for oun
© in ata
@ on
118. We mustn’t shy entry-level
: or freelance jobs as they help us gain
114. These are good rules__ live an insight into the context in which a
by. company operates.
@ with (@) in
(b) to (b) with
© in (©) away from
@ on (@) upon
? : 119. Civil society and media have a major
115. He is the man I have been looking joke tavicaking thes coalltind rack
a the people.
(@) at (a) for
(b) for (b) about
© in (©) with
@ oa (@) over
116, Don’t loiter ites. 120. He travelled Mr. Joshi’s
Pre. car.
Ser! @ vy
(b) around (0) for
© in © in
@ on (@ on
NYRG-F-ENG ~ A 20

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
2 A - NYRG-F-ENG

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
NYRG-F-ENG - A 22

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
23 A - NYRG-F-ENG

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
NYRG-F-ENG ~ A 24