COMBINED GEO-SCIENTIST (P] EXAM2023
NERA EE SS Re Se
DO NOT OPEN THIS TEST BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO
T.B.C. : SDGH-B-GHY Test Booklet Series
Serial No. 1008865
TEST BOOKLET
PAPER—II
( Geology/Hydrogeology )
Time Allowed : Two Hours Maximum Marks : 300
INSTRUCTIONS

1, IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD CHECK
THAT THIS TEST BOOKLET DOES NOT HAVE ANY UNPRINTED OR TORN OR MISSING PAGES:
OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.

2. Please note that it is the candidate’s responsibility to encode and fill in the Roll Number
and Test Booklet Series A, B, C or D carefully and without any omission or discrepancy at
the appropriate places in the OMR Answer Sheet. Any omission/discrepancy will render
the Answer Sheet liable for rejection.

3. You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test Booklet in
the Box provided alongside. DO NOT write anything else on
the Test Booklet.

4. This Test Booklet contains 120 items (questions). Each item comprises four responses (answers).
You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that
there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any
case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.

5. You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided.
See directions in the Answer Sheet.

6. All items carry equal marks.

7. Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test
Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you
with your Admission Certificate.

8. After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination
has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted
to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9. Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.

10. Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE.

(i) There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a
Tong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that
question will be deducted as penalty.

(ii) Ifa candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of
the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that
question.

(iii) Ifa Papetion is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty
for that question.

DO NOT OPEN THIS TEST BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO

1, The main difference between gradualism 4. Match List-I with List-II and select the
and catastrophism is based on which correct answer using the code given
one of the following geomorphic below the Lists :
attributes? List-t List-It

‘ (Landform) (Landform characteristic)
(a) Geomorphic rate A. Laccoliths 1, Vast, saucer-shaped
and layered intrusions
(b) Geomorphic process of basic rocks
B. Phacoliths 2. Sills that have thick-
() Geomorphic law ‘ened to produce domes
C. Lopoliths 3. The largest intrusive
(4) Geomorphic state bodies of basic rocks
D. Stocks 4. Lens-shaped masses
associated with folds

2. Which one of the following processes Olas
played the most dominant role during
evolutionary stages of the atmosphere FA"? Be. Sota
in defining the present-day oxygen Fe or cree
concentration in the atmosphere? oA BCD
(a) Release of wate duri ten Bes Tae hy

fase of water vapour during
volcanic eruption Bek Beles
Se 4 ee
(b) Water vapour —_ decomposition @i An Be. Go 1D
because of solar radiation Bites 2:10 Lanes:
() Photosynthesis 5. Consider the following statements
regarding continental lithosphere :
(d) Oxidation of minerals 1. It consists of buoyant low-density
crust and upper mantle.
2. Part of the lithosphere takes part
3. The zone, marking the end of decrease in in the mantle convection process.
temperature with increase in altitude, is Age ty 1 oo ea
ore 150 km.
Which of the statements given above
mt

Oran is/are correct?

(b) stratopause (@) 1 and 2 only
() 3 only

tropopause
det -san () 1 and 3 only
(d) heliopause (@) 1,2 and3
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 2

6. The “critical temperature at which all 9. Consider the following statements
magnetic materials become non-magnetic regarding incised meander :
is known as 1. It is a depositional feature.
(a) blocking temperature 2. It represents relative drop in base
(®) Curie point level,
3. It generally flows in steep, narrow
(@) phase transition betiock pedi imag aR
(d) secular variation 4, It is associated with floodplains.
iy :chiuaasto"ihe > soncualtate aMRiedes Pe tak, statements given above are
regarding graded river : —
1. It is characterized by necessary (a): 3 andi eaiy!
channel slope and shape to main-
tain minimum velocity required to (b) 2 and 3 only
transport sediment. es
2. It is characterized by sandy aS god 2 Oy.
sediments. (@ 1,2,3and4
3. The graded river is considered as
channel in equilibrium condition. 10. Match List-I with List-II and select the
4. Such river will not be affected correct answer using the code given
by any external disturbance like below the Lists :
faulting across the channel. ‘ ;
List-I List
Which of the statements given above are (Landform) (Geomorphic
correct? agent)
}) Tanke cay A. Blind valley 1. River
4 See in B. Hanging valley 2. Wind
Leda ice g- y ©. Incised valley 3. Groundwater
() 1 and 3 only D. Loess 4. Glacier
(@ 1,2,3 and 4 Caled
8. Which one of the following is not (a) A B c D
associated with sabkhas? 3 1 4 2
(a) Level of the groundwater table (Ol Actas oe
controls the land surface elevation gmap, TNS
(®) Tidal flat dominated by evaporites Py Ga, ie a
(c) Constant wind activity at the BR hak. Ss
surface
@.45. Bi: (Ch D
(@) Subtidal environment Bach oiapsls“g
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 3 [P.T.O.

11. A cube-shaped rock piece having one 14, Match List-I with List-II and select the
dimension of 2m was broken into correct answer using the code given
8 cubes having one dimension of 1 m. below the Lists :
What will be the change in surface area ; ;
because of this mechanical weathering nae aig
process? (Term) (Description)
A. Linear strain 1, Characterized by
(a) No change having two of the
principal stretches
(®) Surface area will change to one and equal to one
half times B, Shear strain 2. Change in length
parallel to given
(c) Surface area will be doubled coordinate
C. Uniaxial strain 3. Change in shape
(@) Surface area will increase to by changes in
four times angle(s)
D. Pure strain 4. Principal axes of
12. In @ basaltic terrain, which one of the oe amiga
coordinate system
(a) Kaolinite Code :
(b) Bauxite (a A B c D
yale eas 2S)
(c) Smectite (A Be cat
(a) Gibbsite 3° 3 geee
(A BC D
i ‘ 2 1 3 4
13. Which one of the following materials
shows a combination of recoverable @a BcoD
elastic strain and permanent deforma- CORD NS ile
tion, analogous to the motion governed
by friction block and a spring connected 15. Folds inwhish the tings ‘sunce! ere
in series? completely detached from the limbs, are
: See called
(a) Visco-plastic (Bingham)
(a) intrafolial folds
; a
(®) Firmo-viscous (Kelvin) Py otoong oon
(¢)" Visco-elastic (Mexwell) () concentric folds
(d) Elastic-plastic (Prandtl) (@) chevron folds
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 4

16. Which one of the following linear 18. Fold that arches sideways is termed as
deformational structures is found
restricted to the interface between a (a) anticlinal fold
competent rock and an incompetent
rock? (b)  synclinal fold
(a) Slickenside (c) neutral fold
(®) Mullion (@) antiformal fold
(¢) Asperity
19. The difference between maximum and
fe Intecbectiens jinedlion: minimum principal stresses (6; - 63) is
called
17. Consider the following statements (a) hydrostatic stress
regarding faults :
(b) deviatoric stress
1, The terms ‘ramps’ and ‘flats’ are
used for steep and sub-horizontal ay
ita, of ange iaiat apirtince! (c) uniaxial stress
2. Sinistral-sense strike-slip faults are (d) differential stress
also called right-lateral faults.
3. Two separate normal faults dipping 20. Which one of the followin,
. g statements
towards each other create a down-
thrown block known as graben. ra
4. A fault that steepens downward is (a) Increasing the confining pressure
called listric fault while downward- makes it necessary to increase
flattening faults are often called the differential stress in order to
antilistric. fracture a rock.
Which of the statements given above are (®) Fracture initiation requires a
not correct? differential stress that exceeds
the strength of the rock.
(a) 3 end 4 (c) In the brittle regime, a deforming
rock accumulates only elastic strain
(b) 2 and 4 before it fractures at a certain
critical level.
() land 4
(d) Compressive strength of a rock is
(@) 1,2 and 3 always less than its tensile strength.
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 5 [ P.T.0.

21. Joint surfaces that display a regular 23. In a structure contour map, an area
pattern of subtle ridges and grooves is entirely enclosed by one or more
diverging from a point or a central axis contours. This structure is known as
are known as

(a) ring structure

(®) Schuppen structure

(a) pinnate structure

(c) closed structure

(d) imbricate structure

() plumose structure badionari s 2

24. Which of the following statements
regarding rose diagram are correct?

(c) Wallner lines

1. The intervals of azimuths are plotted
as pie-shaped segments of a circle
in their true orientation.

(d) feather structure 2. ‘The length of the radius of the
circle is not proportional to the
frequency of measurements having
that orientation.

i i 3. Rose diagrams are used for

22. Which one of the following sets of Sr metas at
combinations you should expect to find ere ee ent or
while carrying out fieldwork in a fault/ ee dinent  eeneportoand stk

vertical joint.

shear zone?

4. Rose diagrams are histograms for
which the orientation axis is
transferred into a circle to give

(a) Striations, skarn, baked contact true angular plot.

Select the correct answer using the code

given below.

(b) Peeudotachylite, gouge, mylonite

(@) 1 and 3 only

(c) Grooves, chill zone, graded bedding (b) 1,3 and 4 only

(c) 2,3 and 4 only

(@) Gouge, skarn, grooves (@ 1,2,3 and 4

SDGH-B-GHY/S5A 6

25. Which one among the following pairs is 28, The tetrahedra repeat distance in a
correctly matched? pyroxenoid chain is
(Crystal (Symmetry) (a) 52A
‘System)
(a) Monoclinic : 2/m 2/m 2/m (o) 73A
(®) Orthorhombic : 6/m 2/m 2/m () B9A
(©) Tetragonal ©: 4/m 2/m 2/m
(@) 178A
(d) Hexagonal : 2/m
26. The mineral pyrite (FeS2) belongs to 29. Lizardite [Mg3Siz05(OH)4] belongs to
which one of the following classes of which one of the following mineral
isometric crystal system? groups?
(a) Diploidal class (a) Serpentine
(b) Hextetrahedral class (®) Chlorite
(c) Hexoctahedral class (c) Epidote
(d) Tetartoidal class (@) Wiite
27. A crystal face has an intercept of
6a: 4b: ec, The appropriate Miller indices 30. Akermanite belongs to which one of the
for this face will be following silicate groups?
(a) 230 (a) Tectosilicates
(b) 100 (b) Phyllosilicates
() 110 (©) Sorosilicates
(@ 321 (4) Inosilicates
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 7 [P-7.0. :

31. Which one of the following mineral 34. Some specimens of plagioclases show
groups exhibits the peristerite, Boggild spectacular colours ranging from blue to
and Huttenlocher lamellar intergrowths? green/yellow and red. This iridescence

is called

Lhe ges (a) asterism

(®) Pyroxene (®) labradorescence

(©) Amphibole (c) fluorescence

(d) phosphorescence
(d) Mica
35. Which of the following statements
regarding micas is/are correct?
32. bart iaradeear lead group L ficas are silicates with a layered
crystal structure in which sheets of
M-(O, OH) octahedra are sandwiched

(a) solid solution between two inward pointing sheets
of linked T-O tetrahedra.

(®) polymorphism 2. In muscovite, two out of three
octahedral sites are occupied

: mainly by Al and in biotite,

CL peepee all octahedral sites are mainly
occupied by Fe and Mg.

(a) pseudomorphism 3. Muscovite differs from phlogopite
and biotite in having its optic axial
plane perpendicular to (010) and

33. Which one of the following pairs haan one a lesccnld avarroat
of minerals is not an example of aro" Alga es
Pon Select the correct answer using the code

given below.

(a) Calcite and Aragonite

(@) 1 only
(b) Tridymite and Cristobalite
(®) 1 and 2 only
(o) Pyrite and Marcasite igi diala's ack
(@) Edenite and Enstatite (@ 1,2 and3
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 8

36. Which of the following statements 3. Alkaline magmas are produced
regarding amphiboles is/are correct? at convergent and within plate
settings.
1, The members of amphibole group Be
of minerals occur in a wide range 4, Tholeiitic magmas are produced
of P-T environments and are the at divergent, convergent and within
common constituents of igneous plate settings.
‘and metamorphic rocks.
Which of the statements given above are
2. The essential feature of the correct?
structures of all amphiboles is the
presence of (Si, Al)-O tetrahedra
linked to form chains having (a) 1 and 3 only
composition (Si, Al)40,)-
(ob) 1,2 and 3
3. Basal sections of amphiboles show
two sets of cleavages with cleavage
angle 87° to 88°. iyea oa
(d) 2 and 4 only
Select the correct answer using the code
given below.
38. Ultramafic volcanic rock with spinifex
texture is called
(a) 1 only
(a) kimberlite
(b) 1 and 2 only (b) boninite
(c) 2 and 3 only (co) harzburgite
(a) 1,2and3 (a) komatiite
39. Concordant lens-shaped (convex upward)
87. Consider the following statements igdeaee anirdbeeasie: pb a, d
regarding the association between
magma series and plate tectonic Leeekth
settings : (olecbeecolt
1, Tholeiitic magmas are produced (®) cupola
only at divergent plate boundaries.
(©) phacolith
2. Cale-alkaline magmas are produced
only at convergent plate margins. (a sit
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 9 [P-7.0.

40. The texture in a basaltic rock where 43. In many dykes, phenocryst phase:

: t phases get
angular interstices between plagioclase concentrated towards the centre of the
grains are occupied by pyroxene, is dykes away from the wall due to
called

(a) flow segregation
(a) vitrophyrie ie
(b) ophitic Oheeacnennee
ate ts () vapour phase exsolution
‘ane baer (@) country rock assimilation
. ‘ 44, Which one among the following basalt
41. Volcanic debris when mixes with 4 ( ere
sufficient water (and produces mudflow) eee ee
is termed as eon
(@ we (a) Continental tholeiitic basalt
© 1 () Alkali olivine basalt
(c) ignimbrite (c) High-K island-are basalt
(@) block-and-ash deposit (@) Normal mid-oceanic ridge basalt
(N-MORB)
42, In the diopside-albite-anorthite ternary
system, the curve along which both 45. Which one of the following pairs of
diopside and plagioclase can coexist minerals is formed during the
is called fenitization of a carbonatite?
(a) cotectic curve (a) Aegerine and Orthoclase
(b) ternary eutectic () Orthoclase and Plagioclase
(¢) tie-tine curve (©) Plagioclase and Microcline
(@) peritectic line (d) Microcline and Aegerine
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 10

46. Granitic rock containing higher Al203 50. Pseudotachylite’ is commonly formed
and having mica, garnet and cordierite due to
plus normative corundum is termed as We
(a) frictional heating
M-type granitoid
one () thermal metamorphism
(b) T-type granitoid ‘
() hydrothermal metamorphism
() S-type granitoid
(d) retrograde metamorphism
(a) A-type granitoid
A 5 51. Which one among the following
47. Which one of the following magma types represents the’ metamorphlam of a
represents a high liquidus temperature sical extent?
> 1650 °C) and is mostly restricted to
Archean time? (@) Impact metamorphism
(a) Komatiite () Burial metamorphism
() Kimberlite (c) Ocean-floor metamorphism
(c) Continental alkaline (d) Subduction metamorphism
(d) Ultra-alkaline and __silica-poor pcre
alkaline 52. Perfectly developed foliation independent
of bedding, resulting from the parallel
a ates Ree arrangement of very fine-grained (not
Z eee es ye, Oat x visible by unaided eye) phyllosilicates in
x aided by mantle plume activity? oan eae Soper ge caned
(a) Volcanic arc basalt (9), .Apestion
(b) Mid-ocean ridge basalt (0) cremulation' cleavage
() Island-arc tholeiite (6)'> tecture. cleavage
(@) Continental flood basalt (d) slaty cleavage
49. ‘Melanosome’ is a term associated with 53. Snowball garnet texture is an example of
which one of the following metamorphic which one of the following types of
rocks? matrix-porphyroblast relations?
(a). Mylonite (a) Pretectonic
(b) Pseudotachylite (b) Syntectonic
(c) Migmatite (©) Posttectonic
(@) Hornfels (d)_Intertectonic
SDGH-B-GHY/55A u [P-7.0.

54, Consider the following statements : 57. What degree of freedom can be ascribed
to a zone, if P and T are considered as
Statement-1 : eeaeers
Metamorphic fabrics commonly Oy ere ee
reflect the alignment of some or all (a) Zero (®) One
of the constituent mineral grains
in particular orientations. () Two (a) Three
Statement-2 : ;
}. The
Preferred orientations may develop be trae
as a result of mechanical rotation muscovite + quartz = sillimanite
of originally asymmetric grains into + K-feldspar + Hj
new orientations. st feed yiolpastbe ies
Which one of the following is correct in =
respect of the above statements? (a) decarbonation reaction
(a) Statement-1 is correct but ) seoatinnous 7eaaeo
Statement-2 is incorrect (c) discontinuous reaction
() Both Statement-1 and Statement-2 (@). solid-solid reaction
are correct
(0). Statement=1 ds incorfect © but 59. In the blueschist-facies rock, which one
Statement-2 is correct of the following minerals shows the blue
our promine:
(a) Both Statement-1 and Statement-2 cereal aaee
adeit
55. The texture in which porphyroblasts Pysaeoette
show small folds in the inclusion trails (c) Glaucophane
within it is called (a) Actinolite
(a) granoblastic texture
ahr docugiatettexnite 60. An eclogite-facies metamorphic rock with
a basic igneous protolith will display the
(c) mortar texture characteristic assemblage of
(2). helicitic: texture (a) homblende + plagioclase + epidote
+ garnet
56. Granoblastic-polygonal is a texture '
commonly present in (b) orthopyroxene + clinopyroxene
: + plagioclase + hornblende
(a) quartzite + garnet + olivine
(b) schists () omphacite + gamet without
(c) phyllites plagioclase
(qd) slates (a) glaucophane + albite + lawsonite
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 12

61. Grain size sorting is extremely poor in 65. In modern ocean basins, zoophycos
occurs in
(a) aeolian deposit fe
; ‘ (a) rocky coast
(b) glacial deposit
{b) sandy coast
(c) fluvial deposit -
(c) sublittoral zone
(a) marine deposit
(a) bathyal zone
62. Which one of the following types of grain 4 ,
contacts signifies maximum amount of 66. Which one of the following sedimentary
compection in a sandstone? structures provides sense of direction of
grain movement?
(a) Concavo-convex contacts a
(a) Parting lineation
Sutured tacts
> oS (®) Longitudinal ridge
(c) Long contacts () Gutter
(a) Point contacts a
68. In a sedimentary rock, different oi Bea: Sead tegen) ace
ee eee Oar eerie fragments and rock fragments that have
ee Otaku wu been released from pre-existing volcanic
bree persscne ~ cowed rock by weathering or erosion and
ee a a Soret transported from their place of origin by
weet air, water or ice are known as
=. (a) pyrociasts
OF se (®) epiclasts
fs EOS (0) autoclasts
(a) 70% (d) tuffs
64, Which one of the following biogenic 68. A grain-supported carbonate rock with
structures. can. be categorized as intergranular spaces occupied by clay
‘icerosion structure’? and fine silt-sized particles is called
(a) Burrow (a) grainstone
(®) Boring (&) wackestone
(c) Fecal pellet (co) packstone
() Stromatolite (@ boundstone
SDGH-B-GHY/55A_ 13 [P.T.O.

69. Epsilon cross-stratification is character- 73. The oldest known bird fossil,
istically formed in Archaeopteryx was recovered from
(a) meandering channel (@) late Jurassic of Germany
(®) inner shelf () Middle Jurassic of Germany
(©) upper intertidal flat () Late Jurassic of China
(@) alluvial fan (@) Middle Jurassic of Australia

70. Debris flow products generally assume ‘74. Speciation occurring in planktonic micro-
which one of the following geometries? organisms on either side of a land

barrier created due to closing of some
(@) Spherical ‘ocean gateways, is an example of
(®) Convex up base and flat top (a) allopatric speciation
() Flat base and convex top () peripatric speciation
(a) Convex base and concave top (c) parapatric speciation
tric speciatior

71. Which one of the following features ps Rg ec
bears the unequivocal signature of :
actin aasbuien® 78. There are many ways to explain

evolutionary trends in fossils including
(a) Common presence of ripple drift ‘punctuated equilibrium’ and ‘phyletic
gradualism’. In the context of evolution
() Presence of parting lineation of trilobites, which one of the following
statements is not correct?
() Regular alternation _ between ,
grainfall and grainflow strata (a) Change in the number of pygidial
a ribs in trilobites is an example of
(d) Poorly sorted sediment puinetinted eqeitioctiion:

72. All calcium carbonate sediments with (®) Change in the number of pygidial
‘ir’ Grit” cic instal GRBs ribs in trilobites is an example of
diagenesis, get transformed into DEVetic gxaddalient:
ia) iota (©) Increasing/Decreasing “number of

thoracic segments is an example of
(b) high-magnesium calcite phyletic gradualism.
(@: leragonite (d) Effacement, the loss of surface
details in the cephalon, pygidium is
(d) vaterite an example of phyletic gradualism.
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 14

76. Exogastric Cephalopoda exhibits 79. Every geological era is subdivided based
on evolution of some particular fossil
group in the geological time scale.

(a) venter on the outside and dorsum Match List-I with List-II and select the
on the inside of the coiling correct answer using the code given
below the Lists :
os ‘List-I List-IT
(b) venter on the inside and dorsum on “
the outside of the coiling teased Brees) sie
A. Planktic foraminifera 1. Paleozoic
(o) no distinction between venter and
asia B. Cephalopods 2. Neogene
©. Conodonts 3. Paleogene
fy easy (ehh D. Larger foraminifera 4. Mesozoic
Code :
777. Which one of the following is an example
of brachiopod with strophic shells?
ui @A Bc D
2 4 1 3
Visbyella
(a) Visbyel Qs MceB. ‘aGdeaD.
2 1 4 3
Magellania
® i A B c D
3 4 1 2
Terebratula
@ si cas Bi CoD
3 1 4 2
(a) Rhynchonella
80. Which one among the following is a
Middle Pleistocene hominine species?
78. Which one of the following Lamellibranch
genera is not found in recent time? idle noltalbiocinie
(a) Pecten
(b) Australopithecus anamensis
(®) Spondylus
ee (c) Paranthropus robustus
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 15 [P.T.0.

81. Which one of the following early horses. ‘84, The ostracods of the order Paleocopida
was grazer? dominated the Paleozoic, but were
fun almost wiped out at the end of Permian.

(@) Pliohippus They are now represented by the lone

) Ht Sal enigmatic genus

hes Meenohiops (a) Manawa

(a) Parahippus (b) Bradoria

82. Which one of the following statements fo einciana:

regarding application of foraminifera in ‘

understanding paleoceanography and (or Perches

paleoclimate is not correct?

(ak ee eae ee or 85. Match List with List-II and select the
@'8q) of planktic foraminifera correct answer using the code given
depends on temperature of calcifi- bare aerges cy
cation and isotopic composition of Hie? Har
ambient ocean water. (atotner Bilaghter

(b) Closing and opening of the ocean Reggina Seen,
gateways can be inferred from A. U235 1, Ni4
biogeographic studies of planktic F
foraminifera, B. Rbm 2. ar?, ca‘?

(¢) During glacial stages, the !80 of cx oe
benthic foraminifera shows lower D. c# 4. Pb®7_7He4
values (decrease).

(@) During glacial stages, the 8'°0 of Code :
benthic foraminifera shows higher
values (increase). eak Boe

4 2 3 1
83. Which one of the following is not a
cordaitalean leaf fossil? yuk. * Be ec a:
1 3 2 4
(a) Cordaites
ans i A B c D
joeggerathiopsis
O) Ke 1; 4, .geeue
(ec) Euryphyltum
(AS Be. SD
(a) Cladophiebis 4° 43) Jae
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 16

86. Rock formations deposited at the same 89. Which one of the following arrangements
stage of the earth’s evolutionary history of the lithostratigraphic units shows the
are referred to as correct order of decreasing age of their

formation /deposition?
(a) syntaxial
(a) Sargur Group > Vindhyan Super-
(®) ditaxial group > Gondwana Supergroup >
Siwalik Supergroup
(c) monotaxial
(b) Siwalik Supergroup > Vindhyan
(@) homotaxial Supergroup > Sargur Group >
Gondwana Supergroup

87. The principle that facies which occur —
in conformable vertical successions of (? ,, Gondwana” Sepeprann> Selle
strata also occur in laterally adjacent Supergroup > ‘ane Super-
modern environments is known as group > Sargur Group
(a) Walther’s law of facies (@) Sargur Group > Siwalik Super-

group > Vindhyan Supergroup >
(b) law of superposition Gondwana Supergroup
(o) law of uniformitarianism
4 90. The stratigraphic position of the
(@) law of faunal succession mrlatclgart Gemeden'4a
88. Which one of the following is an example (a) above the Alwar Group and below
of an era? the Ajabgarh Group
(co (b) above the Ajabgarh Group and
below the Alwar Group
(b) Miocene
@ tm - (c) younger than the Malani volcanics
(@) Cambrian (d) older than the Raialo limestone
SDGH-B-GHY/55A wz { P.T.O.

91. Consider the following quartzite rock 93. Which one of the following fossils is
formations of India : reported from both Kaladgi Group as
1, Irlakonda quartzite vel oo eae
2. Srisailam quartzite

ty (a) Cryptozona sp.
3. Gulcheru quartzite
Which one of the following represents (2)* Collenia'ep:,
the correct stratigraphic order (older to
younger)? (c) Archaeofavosia sp.
(@) 1323 (a) Priscogalea sp.
) 332-1
94. Consider the following statements
UE Ebr 255 regarding Umaria Marine Bed (UMB)
@ 15832 and Manendragarh Marine Bed (MMB) :
1, _UMB is older than MMB.
92. The Vindhyan Supergroup consists of :
Lower Vindhyan (Semri Group) and 2. MMB is older than UMB.
Upper Vindhyan (Kaimur, Rewa and 4
Bhander Groups). Which one of 3. Both UMB and MMB have yielded
the following statements regarding different assemblages of fossils.
Vindhyan Supergroup is not correct?
Which of the statements given above
(a) The Kaimur Group is dominated by is/are cofrect?
calcareous rocks and has preserved
stromatolites.
(b) The Lower Vindhyan (Semri Group) (a) 1 only
is dominated by calcareous rocks
and has excellently preserved
stromatolites. (b) 2 and3
(c) The Kaimur and Rewa Groups
are mostly consisting of siliciclastic
rocks. () land3
(d) The basal conglomerate occurs at
the base of Semri Group. (a) 2 only
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 18

95. Consider the following statements ‘97. Which one of the following pairs of
regarding island arcs : metal and its corresponding ore mineral
is correctly matched?
1. ‘They are long curved chain of =
oceanic island formed by intense
and pure rhyolitic volcanism.
2. They are long curved chain of (a) Nickel : Pentlandite
oceanic island formed by intense
andesitic volcanism.
: 3. Most island arcs originate on the ae
oceanic crust between the oceanic faces Caer
trenches and continental areas.
ements gi
yee oe (c) Titanium : Cassiterite
1
ee ven ein (a) Uranium : Wolframite
(®) 1 and 3 only
Pig ern 98. An interlacing of mineralized veinlets
traversing host rocks is known as
(@ 1,2 and3
(a) ladder veins
96. Lower Cambrian trilobite Redlichia is
known from
(b) saddle reefs.
(a) salt pseudomorph bed
(0) magnesium sandstone ep ee
(¢) neobolus shale
(@) purple sandstone (a) stockworks
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 19 [ P.7.0.

99. Which one of the following terms refers to 101. Which one of the following statements
precipitation and growth of minerals in regarding eluvial placers is not correct?
veins exhibiting a banded appearance?

(a) Eluvial placers are formed due
to meandering of rapidly flowing
stream.

(a) Vestotectefit () Eluvial placers are formed upon hill
slopes.

(c) Eluvial placers are formed without

(b) Crustification stream action.

(a) Eluvial placers are considered as

an initial stage in the formation of

() Breccia fill steamy piacere.
102. Consider the following _ statements
regarding alterations during mineral

(a) Fracture fill deposits formation :

Statement-1 :

Propylitic alteration is characterized
by the development of montmorillo-
100. Which one of the following mineral nite, pyrite and tourmaline.
assemblages refers to ‘black ore’
associated with Kuroko-type deposits? Statement-2 :
Fenitization is associated with
carbonate hosted deposits and is
characterized by the development
(a) Magnetite-ilmenite-rutile of talc, serpentine and orthoclase.
Which of the statements given above
is/are correct?
(b) Chalcopyrite-covellite-molybdenite
(a) Both 1 and 2
(c) Sphalerite-galena-baryte ie ts
(c) 2 only
(a) Pyrite-chalcopyrite-digenite (@) Neither 1 nor 2
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 20

103. Match List-I with List-II and select the 104, Consider the following _ statements
correct answer using the code given regarding formation of metasomatic
below the Lists : mineral deposits :

List-I List-II Statement-1 :
Pc Seer <i Mafic-ultramafic intrusives are
esha commonly associated with meta-

A. Stratiform 1. Residual liquid Wee ee ee

rire apie large quantity of mineralizing fluids
compared to felsic intrusives.

B. Copper-nickel 2. Late magmatic

sulphides injection Statement-2 :
iBsiryid 2, Carbonate rocks host many
C. Pegmatite S: Uegpaemmniect- metasomatic deposits compared to
y arenaceous sedimentary rocks.
eames co Parone Which of the statements given above
titaniferous ‘
5 is/are correct?
magnetite
(a) 1 only
Code :
(b) Both 1 and 2
Gea *p teD () 2 only
4 3 2 1
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
ia Boop 105. Under tropical and subtropical weathering
4 2 3 1 conditions, rocks such as dunite and
peridotite undergo laterization. Which
one of the following silicate minerals is
formed in such laterites?
ee eae te ee (a) Goethite
1 3 2 4
(b) Garnierite
(c) Gibbsite
(a A B c D
1 2 3 4 (ad) Grunerite
‘SDGH-B-GHY/55A a [ P.T.O.

106. Which one of the following statements 108. Match List-I with List-II and select the
regarding coal is not correct? correct answer using the code given
below the Lists :
(a) Peat represents the first stage in List-t Liste
the formation of coal. (Mineral (Location)
deposit)
(b) Lignite has high moisture content. A. Diamond 1. Amarkantak, Madhya
Pradesh
(o) Bituminous coal has low moisture 5 Ba Raemerenetssodbre.
and high volatile content. Pradesh
C. Bauxite 3. Chalk Hills, Tamil
Nadu
(4) Anthracite has low sulphur content. Didtaguedien ls aialasineermenintiive
Pradesh
107. Consider the following statements bee
regarding petroleum reservoir and
caprocks : GR BOD.
4 1 2 3
1. Clay has low porosity and less
permeability, therefore, it is not a mA Bc D
suitable reservoir rock. Rn ait as
2. The most suitable reservoir rocks WA B c D
are sands and sandstones.
3. Hi? 02
3. Shale and clay are pervious
caprocks and cannot retain IA, SE ae oe
petroleum. 3 2 1 4
Which of the statements given above 109. The pore water pressure at the water
is/are correct? table in an unconfined aquifer is
(a) equal to the atmospheric pressure
Qe () much greater than the atmospheric
pressure
(&) 1 only
(c) much less than the atmospheric
() 2and3 aurora
(@) not dependent on the atmospheric
(a) 2 only pressure
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 22

110. The amount of water held in soil after 112. Consider the following _ statements
wetting and subsequent drainage has regarding aquifer property :
become negligibly small, is called
(a). available water 1. Hydraulic conductivity is a function
of the properties of the porous
media and the fluid passing
(b) wilting point through it.
() field capacity
2. Intrinsic permeability is a function
of the fluid passing through the
(a) gravitational water porous media only.
111. Consider the following statements 3. a poe a function
regarding effective porosity of rocks : of the properties of the porous
or a! media only.
1, Effective porosity is the porosity
available for fluid flow.
2. Effective porosity arises due to Which of the statements given above
interconnected pore spaces. is/are correct?
3. For unconsolidated porous media,
porosity and effective porosity
always have different values.
Which of the statements given above are Oh, Fiea:
correct?
(b) 1 and 2
(a) 1 and 2 only
(b) 1 and 3 only
() 3 only
(c) 2 and 3 only
(a) 1,2 and3 (d) land3
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 23 [ P.T.o.

113. Match List-I with List-II and select the 115. Which one of the following statements
correct answer using the code given regarding Darcy's law is correct?
below the Lists :

List-I List-IT
(Aquifer (Dimension) (a) Darcy velocity is proportional to
property) square of the hydraulic gradient.

A. Porosity 1. ort

B. Hydraulic 2. Dimensionless

conductivity (b) Darcy velocity is proportional to
C. Specific storage 3. 127-1 square root of the hydraulic
D. Transmissivity Ae: Ia gradient.
Code :
() Darcy velocity is directly propor-
tional to the hydraulic gradient.
@:A; B.C. D,
3 4 1 2
(a) Darcy velocity is inversely propor-
PEAS Sec .D tional to the hydraulic gradient.
2 1 4 3
QA Bi CeD
Paria eat 116. The Reynolds number (Ng) is expressed
as
@ x sae ic “p
3 1 4 2
(a) Ng = Inertial force x Viscous force

114. The average interstitial velocity of sand (t) Ng = _Inetia force
with effective porosity of 25% is equal to n= vissoua bes?
(a) three times of the Darcy velocity
(b) four times of the Darcy velocity Oi eee

Inertial force
(c) one-fourth of the Darcy velocity
(d) two and half times of the Darcy @ Np= Inertial force
velocity R" Viscous force
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 24

117. Which one of the following is correct 119. Which one of the following does not
about Non-Carbonate Hardness (NCH)? come under spreading methods of
artificial recharge to groundwater?
(a) NCH = Total hardness - Alkalinity (Girabregntngtbods
() Stream-channel method
NCH = Alkalinity - Total hardne:
ie me = (o) Excess pumping method
(@) Ditch and furrow method
() NCH = Total hardness + Alkalinity
120, Which of the following statements
(a ncn = Total hardness regarding artificial recharge of the
Alkalinity groundwater system is/are correct?
1. It neither maintains nor augments
the groundwater resources.
2. It combats saline water intrusion in
118. In application of the stable isotopes ‘ecole:
for groundwater etudy, the estimated 3. It combats adverse condition like
relative fractionation is expressed as pivaasaiie Wivertg’et to grunt:
water level.
(a). deviation in parts per ten thousand Select the correct answer using the code
given below.
(®) deviation in parts per hundred orks
() Vand 2
(c) deviation in parts per ten
() land 3
(d) deviation in parts per thousand (@) 2and 3
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 28 [Pr0.

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
‘SDGH-B-GHY/55A 26

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 27 [P-1.0.

‘SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
kkk
SDGH-B-GHY/55A 28 $S23—10044