COMBINED GEO.sciennisr; (P) EXAM.2023
a EE a ae ee SS 75
DO NOT OPEN THIS TEST BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO
paige behind stdin liimadibchat allah tae Me

T.B.C. : SDGH-U-GKS. Test Booklet Series

Serial No.

1022205 TEST BOOKLET
PAPER—I
( General Studies )

Time Allowed : Two Hours Maximum Marks : 100
= et Baty : 100
INSTRUCTIONS
1. IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD CHECK

THAT THIS TEST BOOKLET DOES NOT HAVE ANY UNPRINTED OR TORN OR MISSING PAGES

OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.

2. Please note that it is the candidate's res; sibility to encode and fill in the Roll Number
and Test Booklet Series A, B, C or D carefully and without any emission ce discrepancy at
the appropriate places in the OMR Answer Sheet. Any omission/discrepancy will render
the Answer Sheet liable for rejection.

3. You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test Booklet in

jox provided alongside. write anything else on

tein ae

4 ‘This Test Booklet contains 120 items (questions). Each item comprises four responses (answers).
You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that
there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any
case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.

5. You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided.
See directions in the Answer Sheet.

6. All items carry equal marks.

7. Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test
Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you
with your Admission Certificate.

8. After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination
has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted
to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9. Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.

10. Penalty for wrong answers :

THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE

OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.

(i) There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each apes for which a
quoetoanewer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that
question will be dedu as penalty.

(ii) Ifa candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of
the given answers happens to be correct and there will be ‘same penalty as above to that
question.

(i) If bah oe is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty
for that question.

See

DO NOT OPEN THIS TEST BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO

re SE ARE, SED TODO. BOIOUE

1. Deserts are generally located at 5. The uplift mechanism that takes place
e . when lighter warm moist air mass rises
(¢), Eapaigrial secon after encountering a colder and denser
ae air mass causes
(eafiblidt 90° tatitade (a) conventional precipitation
am AY
(d) about 65° latitude (b) frontal precipitation
(c) cyclonic precipitation
2. Which one of the following has the (a) orogenic precipitation
adaptation ‘echolocation’ to detect the
Beye 6. Which one of the following managed
(a) Rattlesnake ecosystems has the highest amount of
standing crop?
(b) Barn owl +
(a) Agricultural land
(c) Grasshopper ? coaatng
(wBat () Human habitation
(d) Forest plantation
3. Which one of the following is the most
important stage in the process of
ecological succession? 7. Who among the following was the Viceroy
of India in 1905, when the Partition of
(a) Claim Bengal was announced?
(b) Acceptance by community (a) Lord Ripon
members
() Lord Canning
Reactic
i () Lord Curzon
(a
(@) Settlement ci, ean
4. In which one of the following trophic 8. Ni Darpan, which deals with the
structures of ecosystems, both fungi condition of indigo planters, was written
and bacteria occur? by
(a) Decomposer (a) Michael Madhusudan Dutta
(b) Autotroph (b) Bankim Chandra Chatterjee
(c) Heterotroph (c) Lal Behari Dey
(@) Food web (@) Dinabandhu Mitra
SDGH-U-GKS/54A, 2

9. Who among the following revolutionaries. 12. Which one of the following schematic
founded’ the Hindustan Socialist graphs correctly represents qualitatively
Republican Army? the variation of resistivity p with respect
efit to temperature T for a semiconductor?
(®) Batukeshwar Dutta
(o) Ram Prasad Bismil fq
(d) Chandra Shekhar Azad

T
10. Chronologically arrange the following
events :
1. Invasion of Alexander
2. Indo-Greek Rule in the North-West Oya,
3. Accession of Kanishka
| 4. Accession of Chandragupta Maurya
Select the correct answer using the code
given below.
(a) 4-3-1-2 Foe
(b) 2-3-4-1
(o) 3-4-1-2 ‘4
(a) 142-3
11. Consider the following statements : @ P
1. Ajanta paintings depict stories from
the Jatakas. -
2. Ajanta paintings depict scenes of
women at work, festivals, etc. 13. Which one of the following semi-
conductors possesses the highest value
Which of the statements given above of band gap Ey?
is/are correct?
@ Si
(a) 1 only
() 2 only re
() Both 1 and 2 (@ Gahe
(@) Neither 1 nor 2 (@ Pes
SDGH-U-GKS/54A 3 [Pr0.

14, A steel rod having radius r and length L 17. The oxidation state and covalency of
gets stretched along its length by AL, Al in [AICI (H,0)5]?* are
when a force F is applied to it. If another
rod made of the same material having (@) +3.and 3
radius 2r and length L is subjected to
the same force F, then the elongation (b) +3 and 6
observed for the second rod is () +2and6
(a) 4aL (a) +2and1
(b) 2b
18. What is the total number of orbitals
associated with the principal quantum
canis number 3?
(a) aL/2 (a) 3
(b) 6
15. Which one of the following quantities is 9
dimensionless? (@ 12
(a) Specific weight
19. The phenomenon of radioactivity was
(b) Specific heat first discovered by
(c) Specific density gene pt
() Henri Becquerel
(@) Specific gravity
() Frederick Soddy
(d) Ernest Rutherford
16. Which one of the following is the correct
order of increase of the atomic radius of
the elements? 20. Which one of the following is the correct
electronic configuration of copper?
(@) C<B<Si<Al (a) 1525?2p%3s?3p%3d!4s!
() C<B<Al<Si (®) 1s22s?2p%3s?3p%3a94s?
() C<Si<B<Al (c) 1s?2s?2p°3s?3p%3d!04s?
(@ Si<Al<C<B (@) 1s?2s?2p°3s?3p°3d%4s?
SDGH-U-GKS/54A 4

21. Which one of the following is the shape 23. Which one of the following is not a
of BrFs? Fundamental Duty enshrined in the
Constitution of India?
(a) Octahedral af is
(a) To abide by the Constitution and
respect its ideals and institutions
() Square planar
(0) To protect the national animal and
(6) Square pyramidal national bird
‘esaal bi ss (c) To value and preserve the rich
(9s: THesoa Biren heritage of India’s composite
culture
22. Which of the following statements 6G) Tosetioquana public papa, and)
regarding the Panchayat system is/are abjure violence
correct?
1. The Constitution of India envisages 24. Which of the following statements
a three-tier system of Panchayat. regarding the President of India is/are
correct?
2. Intermediate Panchayat stands : F
between the village and district 1. The President of Indie, is elected by
Panchayats in the State where the an electoral college in accordance:
population is above 20 lakhs. with the system of proportional
representation by means of the
3. All the seats in a Panchayat shall Single transferable vote.
be filled by direct election from
Pat ; 2. The lected members of the
ee Legislative Assemblies of Union
ce oa Territories of Delhi and Puducherry
take part in the election of the
Select the correct answer using the code President of India.
given below.
Select the correct answer using the code
given below.
(a) 1 only
(a) 1 only
2 and 3 only
bed (b) 2 only
() 1 and 3 only () Both 1 and 2
(@ 1,2 0nd 3 (@) Neither 1 nor 2
SDGH-U-GKS/54A s [Pr.0.

25. Which one of the following is not an 28. Microscopic, branched and thread-like
objective of One Stop Centre scheme? structures, which can grow and absorb
nutrition from organic matter, are found
(a) To stop gender-based violence in
(a) bacteria
(b) To support women affected by
() To provide cheaper credit to ene
self-help groups (d) algae
(d) To provide specialized services to
aggrieved women including victims 29. What is the number of chromosomes
of acid attack found in human somatic cell?
(a) 48
26. The movement of a substance against a Pigre
diffusion gradient with the use of energy 46
is known as
(a) 42
(a) active transport
3 30. Which one of the following animals lays
Gl sPaeainn Cenepctt, eggs to reproduce?
(c) water potential gradient (a) Dolphin
(@) solute loss ee
(o) Platypus
(a) Whale
27. Which one of the following has
non-nucleated cells at maturity?
31. Bt Cotton is a genetically modified crop
(a) Xylem parenchyma with a foreign gene from
(a) Bacillus thermolactis
(6) Xylem fibre
‘ined Be
(o) Palisade parenchyma jg. Becthie
(@ Companion cell (a) Bacillus tequilensis
SDGH-U-GKS/54A 6

32. In deep ponds and lakes, which one of 35. What is ‘duff’?
the following vertical zones receives i 3
last ligit;penierasion? (a) Partially decomposed litter
() Weathered rock
(a) Surface
() Muddy puddle
(®) Littoral zone (@) Carcass of a dead animal
(c) Limnetic zone
36. Which one of the following is a gravity
(a) Profundal zone transported soil?
(a) Alluvial
33. What is ecological amplitude? be Sib?
(o) Coltuvial
(a) The range of demands and é
consequent range of tolerance of (a) Glacial
species to the fluctuations in
environmental conditions 37. What is ‘pyrophilous organism’? *
(o) The range of tolerance of a (a) Fresh grass growing after ground
species in constant environmental fire
orate (b) Fungi growing in soils of burt
(©) The range of demands of a eas
species in constant environmental (c) Seeds germinating after clear felling
conditions of forest
ts - 4 iad (d) Organisms with capacity to
pad enn i es ra regenerate the tail after it was lost
due to damage
34. Which one of the following organisms can 38. Which one among the following States
live both in air (outside water) and in of India experienced the highest fall
water? in population growth rate during
2001-2011 in relation to the previous
(a) Xerocole decade?
(@) Andhra Pradesh
(b) Mesocole
(b) Maharashtra
(c) Secondary hydrocole fo. Tamm Had
(d) Mesophyte (d) Madhya Pradesh
SDGH-U-GKS/84A 7 [P-T.0.

39. Which one of the following statements 41. Which one of the following is a lagoon?
about the Austric family of languages (a) Pulicat

spoken in India is not correct?

(b) Deepor Beel

(a) The Austro-Asiatic sub-family of (c) Kolleru
Austric family of languages has
Mon-Khmer and Munda as its two (d) Gohna
main branches.

42, Which one of the following is not

(b) The Munda group of languages is observed by the stations operated by
‘spoken only by the Munda tribes the Central Water Commission?
living in Chota Nagpur. Pig eee

(c) The Mon-Khmer language speakers (®) Silt
are found in two non-contiguous a
areas of Meghalaya Plateau and 0 ee ee
Nicobar Islands. (@) Water discharge

(d) The Khasi language of Meghalaya eh ect n. omeeee

3 process, a nucleus
Holgaee apetnos bear kamen brant spontaneously emits an electron (or
of Austric family. positron) accompanied by the emission
of antineutrino (or neutrino). Which one
of the following statements is not true
40. Which of the following statements about about neutrinos/antineutrinos?
farming in India is/are correct? vi

(a) They are uncharged particles.

1. Dryland farming is confined to the (Oh thee dees ace Vey. axall in
ee Neti tee comparison to that of an electron.
than 100 cm.

(c) They possess charge of magnitude

2. Wetland farming regions are often equal to electric charge.
pee to flood and soil erosion (ih: aie isterech pltiletlier partion

z through weak force only.
Select the t ing the cod
pa ie 44, The radius of the first orbit (n= 1) of a
hydrogen atom is 0:529 A. Then the
radius of the second orbit (n=2) of

(a) 1 only He* ion will be

() 2 only fa) 1058 A

(o) 2116A

(c) Both 1 and 2 fo 4232 A

(d) Neither 1 nor 2 (@) 0529 A

SDGH-U-GKS/54A 8

45. Which one of the following statements for 48. Which one of the following ecological
the emission spectrum of hydrogen is adaptations is not ‘dormancy’?
true?
(a) The Lyman series lies in the visible poli tate
region and the Paschen series lies
Pate rae aa (b) Aestivation
(b) The Lyman series lies in the (c) Diapause
ultraviolet region and the Paschen
series lies in the visible region. (ad) Cyclomorphosis
(c) Both the Lyman and the Paschen
series lie in the visible region.
(@) The 1 Moria iiea tin the 49. What are ‘circadian rhythms’?
ultraviolet region and the Paschen : d :
peraies reeias . (a) Daily responses of animals to light
series lies in the infrared region. conditions
46. Consider the following combination of (6) Growth of plant tip with changing
resistors : light direction
19
(c) Annual responses of living
| pena Weg ° organisms to light conditions
Naa (a) Daily responses of animals to water
availability
‘The equivalent resistance of the
combination of resistors between P and
Qis 50. What is ‘bioenergetic approach’ in
modern ecology?
(fq) 2a
@ 39 (a) Study of similarities. and
differences in food relationships
GSRO: among living organisms and
(@) 2:59 various forms of energy supporting
their life
47. Which one of the following zones of ‘
atmosphere is the farthest from the () Study of energy retention by
cath eustaere ecosystems under threat
(a) Stratosphere (c) Study of energy loss by ecosystems
(b) Mesosphere under threat
(@) Tonosphere (a) Study of energy in deep oceans
(d) Troposphere during cyclone buildup
SDGH-U-GKS/54A 9 [P.T.0.

51. Which one of the following is defined as a 55. Who among the following was the first to
natural biological unit tied together by decipher the Ashokan inscriptions?
the sharing of a common gene pool?

(a) William Jones
(a) Vegetation
() John Marshall
(®) Flora
(c) James Prin:
(c) Fauna fy, za
A ‘
quant (d) Alexander Cunningham
A ‘ ‘ 56. The structure of Mahanavami Dibba is
52. Which one of the following is not a ; 7
non-renewable energy source? situated in which one of the following
places?
(a) Coal
(a) Ujjain
() Oil
(o) Gaur
(c) Sunlight
() Hampi
(d) Nuclear fuel
(d) Mandu

53. The typical Nagara style Shikhara is
visible in which one of the following 57. Chronologically arrange the following
temples? events :

(a) Brihadeshwara Temple, Thanjavur 1, Third Battle of Panipat

(b) Dashavatara Temple, Deogarh 2. Invasion of Nadir Shah

(0) Kailasanatha Temple, Ellora 3. Impeachment of Warren Hastings

(d) Meenakshi Temple, Madurai 4. The Diwani of Bengal transferred to
the East India Company

54, Which one of the following Harappan Select the correct answer using the code
centres specialized in making shell given below.
objects?

(a) Balakot (a) 2-1-4-3

(b) Kalibangan (b) 3-4-2-1

(c) Mohenjo-daro () 1-3-4-2

(@) Banawali (d) 4-3-2-1
‘SDGH-U-GKS/54A 10

58. Lassaigne’s test is used for the detection 61. Which one of the following reagents is
of which of the following elements? used to carry out the transformation
given below?
@ N,S,P, Cl CH (CH2)9COOCH — CHz(CH,)gCHO
DIBAL-H, 0
©) ©.N,P, Br bi iss
(0) Hg/Pd-BaSO,
() C,N,S,1 (c) SnCl2/HCI
(@) ial,
(@ C,N, 8S, Br
62. The electrophile generated in
sulphonation of benzene from fuming
59. What is the use of heavy water? supine eee
(@) SO} (®) SO3H
(a) It is used in nuclear reactors as a
moderator () S03 1G, 80a8
‘ 63. The reaction of 1,2-dibromoethane with
() he used in nuclear reactors as ‘alcoholic KOH yields
5 (@) ethene
(c) It is used in radiation therapy for (b) ethyne
a (c) 1-bromo-2-hydroxyethane
(d) Itis used in water softening plants (d@) 1-bromoethene
64. Consider the following statements
regarding Janani Suraksha Yojana
60. Which one of the following statements sy) :
about Fehling’s test is not correct? 1 TREES Chane: eetientoa ieee
vention under the National Health
(a) Fehling’s A solution is aqueous Mission.
copes aan 2. The objective of JSY is to reduce
i maternal and neonatal mortality.
(®) Fructose gives a positive Fehling’s
test. Which of the statements given above
is/are correct?
() Red-brown ppt of CuO is obtained (a) 1 only
in the reaction. (6) 2 only
(d) Aromatic aldehydes do not respond (©) Both 1 and 2
to this test. (d) Neither 1 nor 2
‘SDGH-U-GKS/54A a [P.7.0.

65. Which one of the following statements 67. What is Academic Bank of Credit (ABC)
regarding Jan Shikshan Sansthan (JSS) as per the National Education Policy
is not correct? (NEP), 2020?
je) edera tis to igcarie! vebateiaal (@) ABC enables credits awarded to

skills to non-literate, neo-literate students for one programme from
and person with rudimentary level @ recognized higher education
cd Sincalisn: {institution to be transferred or
(%) JSS is meant for vocational amma 3
Saconacs ox women only. () ABC is the bank account of the
students for direct transfer of
(©) JSS works at the doorstep of the scholarship
beneficiaries,
() ABC is the newly created
(@ JSS receives grants from the institution for providing credits to
government for skill development. academic institutions for building
infrastructure
(@) ABC is an autonomous banking

66. According to the National Multi- system dealing with the financial
dimensional Poverty Index (MPI) management of higher education
constructed by the NITI Aayog, the institutions under NEP, 2020
education dimension is represented by
parameters pertaining to

68. Which one of the following expressions
1. school attendance ‘has dimensions of energy (here V is the
voltage across a resistor of resistance
anommreof sahonting R and J is the current through the
80 cee ean alee resistor, and t is the time)?
v2
Select the correct answer using the code One
given below.
2
wm oe
(a) 1 only
2
() 1 and 2 only () at
(c) 2 and 3 only
ay Pe
(@) 1,2and3 ai 3
SDGH-U-GKS/54A, 12

69. The angular acceleration of a simple 73. Which one of the following would be a
pendulum at an angle a from the suitable plant to test that chlorophyll is
vertical is proportional to necessary for photosynthesis?

(a) tana (a) Lady Plymouth
() sin? () Cactus
bach () Cuscuta

(@) sin2a (a) Oleander

70. Which one of the following statements

about X-rays is not correct? 74. Quadrat is generally used to enumerate
the number of
(a) X-rays are longitudinal waves.
(b) X-rays are transverse waves, Oe ane carn oe
(c) X-rays are electromagnetic waves. (®) burrows present in an anthill
(a) X-rays do not require a medium to (c) plants present in a unit area
bahigg oe (@) epiphytes on a tree

‘71. The magnitude of work done in moving
an electron across two points having 75. “Athlete’s foot” is a skin disease caused
@ potential difference 6 V is (electronic by

= 1-6x1079
charge = 1:6x ie) tee
(a) 1.2x10719 J he
(a) «10 i) us
oxo?
(®) 9-6x10-9 J ical
(©) 4-8x10719 5 (a) bacterium
@ 16x10 3
76. Which one of the following is a ‘alse
fruit’?
72. Reverberation of sound ensures
(a) a single refraction oa
(b) a single reflection o—
(c) multiple reflections (c) Apple
(a) multiple refractions (@) Apricot
‘SDGH-U-GKS/54A 13 [P1.0.

77. Which one among the following States is 81. Little Andaman is separated from Great
the largest producer of natural gas in Andaman by
India?
Ten De Chann
(a) Madhya Pradesh Se ata .
(&) Jharkhand (b) Homfray’s Strait
(c) Bihar (c) Duncan Passage
Rajasthan
@ me (d) Austen Strait
78. Which of the following statements about
river vallbyaser ete comec 82. Which one of the following is the
1. Kullu Valley is an example of strike international convention agreement
valley. specifying the commitments of different
2. Kangra Valley is a transverse countries to mitigate climate change?
wy: (a) Montreal Protocol
3. Narmada flows in a rift valley.
Kyoto Protocol
Select the correct answer using the code Se
given below. (c) Paris Agreement
Lape (d) Bali Agreement
(b) 2and 3
(c) 2 only sail
83. Which one of the following is a known
(d) 3 only metallophyte for Fe?
79. The Kumaon Himalayas lie between (a) Bichhornia crassipes
(a) Indus River and Satlyj River (0) “Miconia hitescens
(®) Sattuj River and Kali River
(co) Astragalus acemosus
(c) Chenab River and Satluj River
(@) Bhagirathi River and Alaknanda (0); Mentha-crvenms,
River
84. Which following i: "2
80. Which one of the following glaciers is not pre et a rap a
part of Pir Panjal Range? (a) Orange
Irdok
(a) Urdol eee
(6) Sonapani
(c) Bara Shigri (c) Coconut
(@) Gangri (a) Tomato
SDGH-U-GKS/54A_ 14

85. Duckweed or Azolla is used as a/an 89. The ozonolysis of which one of the
16 following alkenes yields a mixture of
(a) pesticide propan-2-one and formaldehyde?
(0) diotertilizer ita,
(o) arsenic indicator ‘by aah
(d) antiseptic (c) 2-Methylpropene
‘ (@) 2-Methylbutene
86. Which one of the following ‘algae’ is
not known identified partner to form
‘lichen’? 90. Which one of the following compounds is
used for the synthesis of silicones?
(a) Nostoc
(a) Sil.
(6) Stigonema h a
Hi) Sil
b si (©) (CHy),Si0%,
meee ss
(@) Vaucheria Oe
(a) Na4Si0g
87. Which one of the following is a secondary
metabolite produced by some plants? 91. Which one of the following products is
formed by the oxidation of phenol with
eee chromic acid?
(b) Terpenoids
(c) Malate (a) ‘e)
(@) Sugar
88. What is ‘phenology’? )
(a) Study of phenol production in
plants
andi OH
(b) Study of periodical phenomena of
plants, such as the time of
flowering in relation to climate
(o) Study of excretory pathway of
phenols by herbivores aay
(d@) Study of phenotypic variation in (a) Oo (e)
newborn individuals of cats
SDGH-U-GKS/54A 15 [P.7.0.

92. Which of the following statements 94, Which one of the following statements
relating to SWIFT is/are correct? relating to the duration of Panchayat is
1, It is a messaging network used by Ree cone
banks and financial institutions
pally Se cick j ans a penibess (a) Every Panchayat shall continue for
So, eile aliens Saancaed six years from the date of its first
to financial transactions. ne
2. It stands for Society for Worldwide
Interbank Financial Telecommuni- ‘
cations! (b) A Panchayat can be dissolved
before the expiry of its term in
z Select the correct answer using the code accordance with the procedure
given below. prescribed by State Law.
QP toaly, (@) Election to Panchayat must take
place within six months of its
Leder! dissolution.
(c) Both 1 and 2
(a) Neither 1 nor 2 (@) A Panchayat reconstituted after
premature dissolution shall
continue only for a remainder of
93. Which of the following statements the period.
relating to the State Election
Commissioner is/are correct?
1, The State Election Commissioner
pees ecceeralt pee 95. Which of the following words/phrases
eee ee was not incorporated into the Preamble
2. The State Election Commissioner to the Constitution of India by the
can be removed only in the same Forty-second Amendment?
| manner as a Judge of a High Court.
Select the correct answer using the code (a) Socialist
given below.
(@) 1 only Lscbrn i,
2 onh
io ae (c) Unity and integrity of the nation
(c) Both 1 and 2
(@) Neither 1 nor 2 (a). Dignity of the individual
SDGH-U-GKS/54A 16

96. Which one of the following statements 98. According to the NITI Aayog SDG India
with regard to the Attorney-General Index, 2020-21, which one among the
of India as per Article 76 of the following States is a Front Runner in its
Constitution of India is not correct? performance on SDG-14?

(a) The Attorney-General of India is ine
appointed by the Chief Justice of
India. (b) Maharashtra
(c) Punjab
() A person who is qualified to be
appointed a Judge of the Supreme (a) Odisha
Court of India is appointed as the
Attorney-General of India.
4 99. The force of buoyancy on an object
() In the performance of his/her floating on water is F, while it is Son an
duties, the Attorney-General shall object that sinks in water. The weight of
have right of audience in all courts both the objects is W. Which one of the
in the territory of India. following is always true?
(d) The Attorney-General shall hold @) F=Waend's=0
office during the pleasure of the
President of India. () Both F and Shave upward direction
(c) F has upward direction and S has
downward direction

97. Which part of independent India had 3
held the first election based on OD. ntact Histone
universal adult franchise?

(in Mets 100. Infrasonic sounds have frequencies
(a) above 25 kHz
(o) Manipur
(b) between 20 kHz and 25 kHz
(©) West Bengal i ieee sass
(@) Nagaland (d) between 20 Hz and 20 kHz
SDGH-U-GKS/54A 17 [P.7.0,

101. When the temperature of a gas increases, 104. The FV graph for two resistors, resistor 1
the average speed of its molecules (R,) and resistor 2 (R,), are shown
below :
(a) remains the same
Rx
(0) decreases {
(¢) increases t ‘ Ry
(a) either increases or decreases :
depending on the gas :
vy
102. Which one of the following is the quantity ard
of transfer of linear momentum to the i
floor, when a dumbbell of mass 500 g Which one of the following statements
falls from a height of 5 m and stops after about these resistors is not correct?
hitting the floor (take g= 10 m/s)?
ot de (a) R, follows Ohm's law.
@) (OS heme (b) Ry does not follow Ohm's law after
(b) 5-0 kg-m/s voltage Vj.
? () Up to Y, the resistance of R is
109 Saas) smaller than that of Rp.
@) 1-0 ke-m/s (d) Up to \, the resistance of R, is
larger than that of Rp.
103. The gravitational force (F) on mass M due
to another mass m at a distance x is 105. In which of the following situations will
given by (vector x is from mass M to an applied force do negative work on a
mass m and unit vector # is the body?
corresy ‘unit vectot
a ¥ (@) The applied force and displacement
(a) r-cMm, of the body are at 135° to each
33 other
fis (b) The applied force and displacement
@) F--c*te of the body are parallel to each
x other
: Mm (c) The applied force and displacement
Gh EG art of the body are perpendicular to
each other
 F-cM@, (d) The applied force and displacement
a of the body are at 45° to each other
SDGH-U-GKS/54A. 18

106. Which one of the following is a tributary 109. Which one of the following countries is
of Krishna River? landlocked?
(@) Harangi (a) Paraguay
©) Hae () Uruguay
ee aoe (c) Suriname
(a) Munneru
(@) Colombia
107. Which of the following statements about
breaks in the South-West Monsoon 110. Which one of the following States of India
is/are correct? has the largest area under ravines?
1, In Northern India, rains are likely 7
to fail if the rain-bearing storms Qe er Reagent
are not very frequent along the () Himachal Pradesh
monsoon trough.
(6) Punjab
2. In the West Coast, the dry spells
occur when winds blow parallel to (@) Gujarat
the coast.
Select the correct answer using the code 111. According to the Climate Change
given below. Performance Index (CCPI), 2023, India
limbed two spot:
es al spots to rank
@ 2 only (a) seventh
(c) Both 1 and 2 (b) eighth
(@) Neither 1 nor 2 (o) ninth
108. According to the Solid Waste Gee
Management Rules, 2016, the
responsibility of waste generators has 112. Freddie, Elton, Oban, Siyaya, Aasha,
been fixed for segregation of waste in ‘Tbilisi, Sasha and Savannah are names
which of the following streams? of
(@)’ Biodegradable ‘and ‘non-biodegrad- (@) nuclear reactors of Ukraine
able wastes
oy hasten git nappies ee ) one brought to India from
(©) Wet, dry and domestic hazardous it
pet ig () National Parks of Tanzania
(d) Recyclable and non-recyclable (@) tropical and ~—_—_ sub-tropical
wastes grasslands
SDGH-U-GKS/54A 19 [PT.O.

113. Who among the following players won 117. The area under millets cultivation is the
the Golden Boot Award in FIFA World highest in
Cup, 2022?
(a) Asia
(a) Lionel Messi
(®) Kylian Mbappe Bichon
() Angel Di Maria (¢) America
(@) Thomas Muller (d) Europe
114. Thundi Beach and Kadmat Beach, which te “ a
redentijentered theloavcted list of Biue 128+ | Who, among the follwingiie credited with
Boacbieseanos label “given sto,.the pioneering the oral rehydration therapy?
cleanest beaches in the world, are (@) Anandi Joshi
located in
(a) Puducherry (b) Bidhan Chandra Roy
(b) Lakshadweep (c) Dilip Mahalanabis
(c) Kerala (da) Siddhartha Mukherjee
(d) Andaman and Nicobar Islands
119. According to scientists, which one of the
118. The recent outbreak of extremely following is the only known animal,
contagious lumpy skin disease affects except for humans, capable of telling
mostly which one of the following the difference between odd and even
animals? numbers?
ee (a) Butterfly
Coe (b) He bee
ion
© Pig fs
(a) Horse (¢) Dragonfly
(@) Cricket
116. According to the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), one
of the recent large-scale accidental 120. Who among the following is the recipient
releases of methane gas into the ocean of Nobel Prize in Medicine in 2022?
occurred it
‘ip (a) David Julius
(a) Exxon Valdez
(b) Nord Stream | etcetera
() Deepwater Horizon 6), Chasigg Movitice
(@) Atlantic Empress (@) Ardem Patapoutian
‘SDGH-U-GKS/54A, 20

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
SDGH-U-GKS/54A 21 [P-T.0, |

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
SDGH-U-GKS/54A, 22

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
SDGH-U-GKS/54A 23 [P.n0. |

SPACE FOR ROUGH WORK
kkk
SDGH-U-GKS/54A 24 ‘$823—25068