
===== PAGE 1 =====
I.F.S, EXAM-(M) 2018 
FSI-D-AHVS 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND VETERINARY SCIENCE 
Paper -II 
Time Allowed: Three Hours 
Maximum Marks : 200 
Question Paper Specific Instructions 
Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting 
questions: 
There are EIGHT questions in all, out of which FIVE are to be attempted. 
Questions no. 1 and 5 are compulsory. Out of the remaining SIX questions, THREE are to 
be attempted selecting at least ONE question from each of the two Sections A and B. 
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck off, attempt of a 
question shall be counted even if attempted partly. Any page or portion of the page left 
blank in the Question-cum-Answer Booklet must be clearly struck off. 
All questions carry equal marks. The number of marks carried by a question/part is 
indicated against it. 
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only. 
Neat sketches may be drawn, wherever required. 
SECTION A 
Ql. 	
Write short notes on the following: 	
8x5=40 
The different features in bones and respiratory system of birds and 
domestic animals 	
8 
Mechanism of erythropoiesis and its regulation in animal body 	 8 
Avian influenza virus and its effect on human health and poultry 
industry 	
8 
Management of tympany in large ruminants 	
8 
Factors to be considered in setting achievable goals for a disease control 
programme 	
8 
FSI-D-AHVS 	
1
===== PAGE 2 =====
Q2. (a) 	
Furnish in detail the techniques for preparation and processing of 
animal tissues for histo-pathological examination in a laboratory. 	15 
Describe in detail the factors that influence blood coagulation and the 
process of coagulation in animal system. 	
15 
Describe in detail about the foetal components of placenta of porcine 
with a neat sketch. 	
10 
Q3. 	
(a) A carcass of a one-year-old bull was presented to you for post-mortem 
examination, with the history of sudden onset of lameness, depression, 
anorexia, high rise of body temperature, hot and painful swelling on 
shoulder and gluteal region since a day. The affected muscles on its 
incision exhibited dark red to black coloured foul smelling, 
serosanguineous fluid having gas bubbles of varying sizes. The thoracic 
cavity and pericardial sac revealed blood-strained fluid with little 
amount of fibrin. Marked oedema along with congestion was observed in 
the lungs. There were haemorrhages on intestinal mucosa. The 
impression smear's examination of oedematous fluid showed presence of 
gram positive, rod-shaped organisms. 
What is your tentative diagnosis and methods for its confirmative 
diagnosis? 	
5 
Give control measures and treatment schedule for such cases. 	
10 
During the White Revolution, the Government of India had introduced 
cross-breeding programme towards self-sufficiency in milk production. 
List out the diseases that emerged in the cross-bred animals and write 
in detail about the pathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment and control 
measures of Anaplasmosis. 	
15 
Explain in detail about the collection, methods of preservation and 
dispatch of various kinds of samples from a dead animal for laboratory 
investigation especially for suspected poisoning 	
10 
FSI-D-AHVS 	
2
===== PAGE 3 =====
Q4. (a) 	
Define and classify Zoonosis. Explain in detail the common means of 
transmission of pathogens from animals to humans and also list out the 
higher risk of serious illness in zoonotic diseases. 	
15 
What is epidemiological measure ? Write the applications of 
epidemiology in disease control. 	
15 
Write in detail about the cellular mechanism of drug action. 	 10 
FSI-D-AHVS 	
3
===== PAGE 4 =====
SECTION B 
Q5. 	
Write short notes on the following: 	
8x5=40 
Sources of contamination in clean milk production and how to overcome 
the above 	
8 
Concept of value addition in meat 	
8 
Why is there an increase in demand for organic milk ? Write in brief 
about farm fresh milk and organic milk 	
8 
How stomachs and intestines of a slaughtered ruminant are processed to 
obtain better price ? 	
8 
Constraints in the course of technology dissemination at the farmers' 
doors 	
8 
Q6. 	
(a) What are the factors deteriorating the quality of market milk? Describe 
in detail how Codex Alimentarius Commission is helpful in quality 
control of milk and milk products. 	
15 
Describe in detail about the various processing steps involved in 
commercial ghee, ice-cream and khoa production and the legal quality 
standards adopted in India. 	
15 
List out the common adulterants in Indian milk and write about the 
various methods of detection of milk adulteration at home level. 	10 
Q7. 
(a) How can the quality of mutton and chicken be improved with the 
existing slaughter and meat sale facilities in our country? 	
15 
What are meat products ? Classify meat products and write in detail 
about the need for processing meat products and their preservation. 	
15 
Sixty-five percent of a buffalo is by-product. Explain, in detail, how an 
entrepreneur is going to manage a slaughter house profitably. 	
10 
FSI-D-ATIVS 	
4
===== PAGE 5 =====
Q8. (a) 	
To improve the socio-economic condition and sustainable livelihood of 
small-holding farmers, suggest innovative Animal husbandry practices 
which fit in their resources and environment. 	
15 
How can electronic media in rural conditions serve as an effective source 
of advice and assistance to farmers to improve their production and 
marketing of their produce? 	
15 
Write in detail about the merits and demerits of rabbit rearing in India. 
10 
FSI-D-AHVS 	
5