
===== PAGE 1 =====
LIES. EXAM-p) 2018 	
FSI—G—ENG 
GENERAL ENGLISH 
Time Allowed : Three Hours 
Maximum Marks : 300 
QUESTION PAPER SPECIFIC INSTRUCTIONS 
Please read each of the following instructions carefully 
before attempting questions 
All the questions are to be attempted. 
The number of marks carried by a question/part is indicated against it. 
Word limit in questions, if specified, should be adhered to. 
You must not disclose your identity in any of your answers. 
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only. 
FSI-G-ENG/49 	
1 	
[ P.T.O.
===== PAGE 2 =====
1. Write an essay of 800 to 1000 words on any one of the following topics : 	
100 
Education as Social Justice 
The Earth as Home 
The Future of Heritage Buildings 
Compassion as a Human Virtue 
2. (a) Write a letter to the Editor of a newspaper complaining about the errors in 
the language of news reporting. 	
25 
(b) Write a report on a school programme you organized on the theme— 
"Good sense is ecological sense". 	
25 
3. Write a précis of the passage given below in about one-third of its length. 
Please do not give any title : 	
50 
The main principle of good management, in its simplest form, can be stated as 
"Do unto others as you would have them do unto you". 
Personal failures in an organization are seldom the result of the individual alone—
far too often they are failures in leadership, which can be prevented. To prevent 
failure, the leadership of every organization must accept full accountability, and 
be committed to the positive actions necessary for successful human resources 
management. 
The success of an organization depends on having an adequate number of people in 
the right job at the right time, all producing at their highest capacity. Managers 
cannot, then, expect intelligent human relations to develop spontaneously while 
most lime and effort is devoted to consideration of tasks and resources. 
It complicates things significantly when a struggle is necessary to place human 
resource activities on the same level of importance in the minds of managers as 
material resources. Whenever consideration of the human element is of less than 
primary importance in management circles, ultimate success of the organization 
is in question. 
Management has been defined in very simple terms as getting things done with and 
through the efforts of other people, and that function breaks down into two major 
responsibilities, planning and control. 
FSI—G—ENG/49 	
2
===== PAGE 3 =====
Planning consists of deciding what you want your people to accomplish. 
This involves the careful determination of needs, the establishment of objectives, 
the outlining of procedures that will attain those objectives, and the proper 
assignment of responsibility to individuals or groups of individuals. 
Control requires the use of various methods which will stimulate the people control 
factors that require attention : organization structure and supervision. 
Unless the organization structure is simple and all who are part of it understand it, 
it will defeat its own purpose, which is to enable people to work together in groups 
as effectively as they would work alone. There should be no misunderstanding 
about individual or departmental authority and responsibility, or about inter-
relationships between individuals and organizational units. 
The function of supervision is to close the gaps between desired performance 
and actual human performance. If the mere issuance of policies and instructions 
would cause people to do what they are supposed to do, supervision would not 
be necessary. 
Management, then, is the development of people—not the direction of things. If this 
fact is accepted, many management difficulties disappear. The manager who says 
that he or she would rather exhaust him or herself doing things correctly than 
expend the time and patience necessary to get other people to do them correctly 
is admitting that he or she cannot manage. 
Thus, management and human resources administration are one and the same, 
and should never be separated. Management is human resources administration. 
4. 	
Read the passage and answer the questions that follow in about 30-40 words each: 
10x5=50 
Trees are nature's pumps; they take up water through their roots and release 
moisture through their leaves. We don't directly consume wood and so the water 
that is unsuitable for crop irrigation is quite all right for them. 
In soaking up the wastewater, the trees prevent waterlogging and accumulation 
of water in large stagnant ponds. 
A technique known as the 'ridge and furrow method' that uses trees to deal with 
sewage water, has been developed. Shallow furrows are dug two metres apart 
and the excavated soil is heaped up between these furrows to form ridges about 
one metre wide and 60 cm high. The length of the furrow-ridge depends on how 
much sewage water has to be released into the area everyday. 
FSI—G—ENG/ 49 	
3 	
[ P.T.O.
===== PAGE 4 =====
On the ridge are planted tree species which take up lots of water and tolerate high 
moisture contents in their root zone. The best species for this is eucalyptus since 
it is an evergreen tree and therefore, an active 'pump' throughout the year. 
The next best is poplar—but it is inactive during winter when it sheds its leaves. 
Subabul is also suitable for the purpose. 
The very hot and the very cold months are not a good lime to plant, but otherwise, 
if water is available, one can plant at any time. The best period is February. 
This goes for both eucalyptus and poplar. A three metres space between the 
saplings should be provided. After planting, sewage water should be diverted into 
the furrows. 
An excellent 'finishing touch' is to add the algae called Spirulina platensis. 
The trees and the algae together soak up the dirty water and release pure, clean 
moisture into the air. 
Industries can make use of trees to reduce the harm done by their effluents and 
they should choose the tree species according to the nature of their waste products. 
Depending on the factory, its wastewater may be loaded with heavy toxic elements 
like copper, zinc, cadmium, nickel, cobalt, chromium, manganese and lead. If this 
water is used to irrigate crops, the plants will take up these toxic elements and 
when we eat the grain, vegetables or fruit, the concentrated elements will enter 
our bodies too, with harmful consequences for our health. 
But water is precious and should never be wasted, so how can effluents be 
removed? There are several means of water purification—some of them involving 
expensive installations. The industrialists baulk at these because it will add to 
the cost of their product and make them 'less competitive'. 
The cheapest, safest, most effective way to tackle factory effluents is by planting 
trees. 
The movement towards a deeper commitment to environmental protection through 
planting new trees and taking care of the existing ones, is rapidly increasing all over 
the world. At the global level, trees and forests are closely linked with weather 
patterns and also the maintenance of a crucial balance in nature. Hence, the task 
of environmental protection is a universal responsibility of all. 
Questions : 
How do trees prevent waterlogging? 
What is the 'ridge and furrow method'? 
FSI-G-ENG/ 49 	
4
===== PAGE 5 =====
What quality of the eucalyptus has been described in the passage? 
Explain why wastewater from the factories is injurious to health. 
Why is it a universal responsibility to protect the environment? 
5. (a) Rewrite the following sentences after correcting the grammatical errors in 
each : 	
1x1010 
There is too many people in the room. 
I kept the box besides me. 
I have no expert in the area so I cannot do the work. 
Let there be no misunderstanding between you and I. 
Did he played the first match? 
Wanted armchairs for old people with folding legs. 
Colleges spend a lot of money on equipments. 
I shall respond to your letter after I return back. 
The meeting will be held between 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. 
He is one of the finest actor in Indian cinema. 
(b) 
Make sentences using the following words in such a way that the meaning 
of each word is clear from the context : 	
2x5=10 
Confirm; Conform 
Luxuriant; Luxurious 
Idle; Idol 
Devise; Device 
Defy; Deify 
FSI-G-ENG/49 	
5 	
[ P.T.O.
===== PAGE 6 =====
(c) Use the following idiomatic expressions in sentences in order to bring out 
their meaning : 	
2x5=10 
Being in somebody else's shoes 
See eye to eye 
Kangaroo court 
Between devil and the deep sea 
Catch red-handed 
(d) Write the adjectival forms of the following words : 
ro 
Signify 
Cinema 
Benevolence 
Vulgarity 
Turbulence 
1 x5=5 
(e) 	
Write the noun forms of the following words : 	
1 x5=5 
N 
Tenacious 
Proficient 
Irreverent 
Disturb 
Eloquent 
FSI-CkENG/49 	
6
===== PAGE 7 =====
6. 	
Rewrite the following sentences as directed : 	
2x 5=10 
He said that his neighbour was bitten by a dog. 
He is so weak that he cannot play. 
He was ill. He came to the party. 
Commercial reasons rule the cinema industry. 
She must weep or she will die. 
(Change to direct speech) 
(Rewrite using 'too') 
(Combine using 'despite') 
(Change to passive voice) 
(Change to complex sentence) 
* * * 
FSI-G-ENG/49 	
7 	
BS9-1218