
===== PAGE 1 =====
I.F.S. 
ftylvW DETACHABLE
AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERING
Paper II
Time Allowed : Three Hours
Maximum Marks : 200
QUESTION PAPER SPECIFIC INSTRUCTIONS
Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting questions.
There are EIGHT questions in all, out of which FIVE are to be attempted.
Question Nos. 1 and 5 are compulsory. Out of the remaining SIX questions, THREE are to be 
attempted selecting at least ONE question from each of the two Sections A and B.
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck off, attempt of a question 
shall be counted even if attempted partly. Any page or portion of the page left blank in the 
Question-cum-Answer Booklet must be clearly struck off.
All questions carry equal marks. The number of marks carried by a question/part is indicated 
against it.
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only.
Unless otherwise mentioned, symbols and notations have their usual standard meanings.
Assume suitable data, if necessary and indicate the same clearly.
Neat sketches may be drawn, wherever required.
fsi-d-agre
===== PAGE 2 =====
SECTION ‘A’
1 (a) 
Define fami mechanization index. Discuss the mechanization status of different
fann operations in India. What is the power availability on Indian famrs and their
constituent sources compared to developed countries. 
8
l.(b) 
Differentiate between the following; 
^
(i) Cl and SI engine
(h) Octane Number and Cetane Number 
(lii) Thcmial efficiency and Mechanical efficiency
(iv) Caster angle and Camber angle in tractor
l.(c) 
List the factors to be considered for the design of biogas plant. Briefly discuss the
components of a biogas plant with the help of neat sketch. 
8
l.(d) 
Total draft of a 4-bottom trailed Mould Board plough is 2000 kg when it is moving
at a speed of 6 km/h. Calculate
(i) 
the unit draft in kg/cni^ if the depth of cut is 20 cm
(ii) drawbar horse power required to operate the implement and
g
(iii) field capacity.
1.(e) 
What is secondary tillage system? Write its objectives. Explain utility of spike
tooth and spring tooth harrows. 
^
2.(a) 
Explain the importance of cooling system m a tractor. Describe the principle and
working of a forced circulation system. Why thermostat is used ? 
1 0
2.{b) 
Explain the working principle of internal combustion engine. How it differs from
external combustion engine ? 
^ ^
2.(c) 
A 4-stroke engine has a mean effective pressure of 7 k g W ; area of piston
730 cm^; 45 cm stroke length; 110 kg-m torque due to brake load; 4-5 kg fuel 
consumption per hour and working speed 120 rpm. Calculate IHP, BHP, 
Mechanical efficiency and specific fuel consumption. 
10
2.(d) 
Calculate the compression ratio and clearance volume of an engine whose 
dimensions are 100 x 120 mm and the length of clearance space at top dead centre
being 8 mm.
3,(a) 
Describe in brief various energy efficient cooking stoves and alternate cooking 
fuels.
3.(b) 
Describe the working of wind energy system with the help of line diagram along
with main components. 
' ^
fsi-d-agre 
~
===== PAGE 3 =====
3.(c) 
Find out height and diameter of the digester of a bibgas plant, whose design
is to be .matched with mpiit feed from dairy of 80 cows and 40 calves. 
Follow'ing assumptions may be made ;
Calves produce half gobar (dung) compared to cows 
Average gobar (dung) available per cattle per day = ] 0 kg 
Average biogas available per kg gobar (dung) per day = 0-03 m^
Average content of solid in gobar (dung) = 18%
Average bulk density of gobar (dung) = 1100 kg/m-’
Optimum ratio of gobar (dung) ; water in slun^ - 1 ; 1 
10
3.(d) 
What is the function of hydrauhc nozzle in plant protection equipment? Enlist
different types of hydraulic nozzles and their application. 
10
4 (a) 
Discuss about safety and maintenance measures of electnc motors to be used for
agricultural operations. What types of motors are normally used in Agricultural
sector ?
4 (b) 
An agricultural machine has to be operated by solar energy. What should be the area
of solar panel nonnal to Sun’s rays (assuming very sunny day) in India with
following parameters ?
Energy requirement : 7-5 kW 
-Efficiency of solar cell : 75%
Efficiency of battei^ : 90%
Efficiency of electric motor ; 85%
Also calculate the power availability on cloudy day (make necessary assumption if
required)
4.(c) 
What is the significance of ergonomics in farm machine design ? Define human
efficiency. Describe the methods to assess human energy consumption of a farm 
worker. What are vanous angles the agriculture worker has to work ? 
1 0
4.(d) 
Why decibel scale is used for sound measurement ? What is the sound pressure tor
a 80 dB(A) sound of a tractor ? If the sound pressure is increased eight times, 
detei-mine the resulting sound in dB(A). What are tractor seat vibration 
parameters ? Discuss in detail. 
^ ^
SECTION ‘B’
5.(a) 
Discuss the advantages of cold storage in respect of food processing. What is cold
food chain ? How it works ?
5.(b) 
What parameters are to be considered while designing a bucket elevator ? Describe
briefly.
5 (c) 
With respect to sterilization of food, define thermal death time and decimal
reduction time. What can be the effect if the stenhzation is not done. . 
1 0
5.fd) 
Write basic pnnciples involved m working of thermocouples. How law of
intemiediate temperature and metals is used in design of themiocouples 1 Also 
explain the constRiction and advantages of theniiopiles. 
1 0
fsl-d-agre
===== PAGE 4 =====
6.(a) 
Classify flow meters. Explam the functioning of a hot wire anemometer. Draw a
neat sketch. 
1 0
6.(b) 
Write the working principle of the following : 
10
(i) Piezoelectric transducer
(ii) Pyrometer
(lii) Semi conductor resistance sensors
(iv) Signal conditioning
(v) Vibration meter
6.{c) 
Describe different types of torque sensors along with their working principles.
How the torque of PTO pulley can be measured ? 
1 0
6.(d) 
Discuss the criteria and methods of sorting of food materials. Draw sketch of
pneumatic method sorting machine. 
I 0
7.(a) 
What are the benefits of size reduction in food processing ? A crusher requires
10 kW for grinding a material at the rate of 100 kg/h from 2 cm size to 0-5 cm 
size. How much power would be required if the reduction was to 0-4 cm. Use both 
Kick’s law as well as Rittinger’s law to solve the problem 
10
7.(b) 
Write the physical and thermal properties of food and their importance in food
processing. Apple juice needs to be concentrated using an evaporator from an 
initial moisture content of 85% (w.b.) to a final moisture content of 50% (d.b.). 
Calculate the amount of moismre required to be removed from 100 kg of apple 
juice to achieve the same. Draw a mass balance diagram for the same. 
10
7.(c) 
Define water activity. Draw a typical drying cui-ve and explain the mechanism
of di-ying. How moisture content could be quickly removed — explain various 
measures. 
10
7.(d) 
Explain five important static characteristic parameters of a simplified measuring
system. Derive an expression for output of a first order instrument. 
10
8,(a) 
Define precision and accuracy of an instrument with suitable examples. 
1 0
8.(b) 
Discuss the functions of CPU and memory devices in computers. 
How
microprocessor helps in aquisition of data related to agnculture ? 
10
8-(c) 
Write different technological options available for utilization of rice husk. 
10
8.(d) 
Write the problem associated with storage of rice bran and its possible reasons.
Explain with the help of suitable flow diagram the extraction of oil from rice 
bran. 
10
fsi-d-agre 
4