
===== PAGE 1 =====
Combined Medical Services Examination-2020 
Paper-I 
1. 
A chronic alcoholic develops a paroxysm of palpitations after alcohol binge. Which of the 
following Arrhythmia is most likely? 
(a) Ventricular fibrillation  
(b) Ventricular premature complex  
(c) Atrial flutter  
(d) Atrial fibrillation  
2. 
An elderly-man with history of Diabetes mellitus and Coronary Artery Disease comes for 
follow-up, with complaints of muscle pains. Which one of the following drugs could be the 
most likely cause? 
(a) Aspirin  
(b) Glimepiride  
(c) Enalapril 
(d) Atorvastatin  
3. 
A 40-year old lady comes to outdoor clinic with complaints of sudden onset chest pain. The 
chest X-ray shows bilateral Pneumothorax. Examination reveals abnormalities of body 
habitus-including long arms, legs and finger (arachnodactyly), scoliosis, high arched palate, 
joint hypermobility, and a pansystolic murmur at cardiac apex. Which one of the following 
diseases is most likely? 
(a) Takayasu’s arteritis  
(b) Raynaud’s syndrome 
(c) Marfan’s syndrome  
(d) Rheumatic heart disease-Mitral regurgitation  
4. 
All of the following are indications for treadmill testing/exercise-testing EXCEPT: 
(a) To confirm the diagnosis of angina  
(b) To evaluate stable angina 
(c) To assess outcome after coronary revascularization  
(d) To evaluate the treatment efficacy of antianginal drugs 
5. 
Kussmaul’s sign is present in all of the following conditions, EXCEPT: 
 
(a) Massive Pulmonary Embolism 
(b) Restrictive Cardiomyopathy 
(c) Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy  
(d) Right Ventricular Infarction  
 
6. 
Which one of the following is NOT a common cause of atrial fibrillation? 
 
(a) Mitral regurgitation 
(b) Hypothyroidism 
(c) Hypertension 
(d) Acute myocardial infarction
===== PAGE 2 =====
7. 
In an ECG recording, P wave is produced by: 
 
(a) Atrial depolarisation 
(b) Atrial repolarisation 
(c) Ventricular depolarisation 
(d) Ventricular repolarisation 
8. 
Which one of the following modalities is NOT used in the treatment of ventricular 
tachycardia? 
 
(a) DC Cardioversion 
(b) Injection Lignocaine 
(c) Injection Amiodarone 
(d) Injection Adenosine 
9. 
Which one of the following drugs is a Direct Renin Inhibitor? 
 
(a) Benedipine 
(b) Azilsartan 
(c) Aliskiren 
(d) Lisinopril 
10. 
All of the following are causes of systolic hypertension with wide pulse pressure EXCEPT: 
 
(a) Aortic regurgitation 
(b) Thyrotoxicosis 
(c) Patent ductus arteriosus 
(d) Aortic stenosis 
11. 
Signet-ring sign on CT-chest is suggestive of:  
(a) Bronchiectasis 
(b) Active alveolitis  
(c) Aspergilloma 
(d) Sarcoidosis  
12. 
Oral corticosteroids are best introduced in the treatment of chronic bronchial asthma when it 
is: 
(a) Mild persistent  
(b) Moderate persistent  
(c) Severe persistent  
(d) Very severe persistent  
13. 
An 18-year old male has insulin dependent diabetes, with malabsorption syndrome and 
bilateral upper lobe bronchiectasis. A diagnostic work-up will include all EXCEPT:  
(a) 24 hour fecal fat-estimation   
(b) CT-chest  
(c) Lung biopsy  
(d) DNA sequencing study
===== PAGE 3 =====
14. 
Which one of the following antigens is commonly associated with causation of Farmer’s 
lung? 
(a) Penicillium  
(b) Actinomycetes  
(c) Aspergillus  
(d) Candida  
15. 
The Gene X-pert test used for MTB detection has the additional advantage of detection of 
which of the following? 
 
(a) INH resistance 
(b) Rifampicin resistance 
(c) Multi drug resistance 
(d) Ethambutol resistance 
16. 
The most common cause of chronic type II respiratory failure is: 
(a) Severe pneumonia 
(b) Severe COPD 
(c) Severe bronchial asthma 
(d) Severe pulmonary thromboembolism 
17. 
The most frequent symptom in respiratory diseases is: 
(a) Breathlessness 
(b) Chest pain 
(c) Hemoptysis 
(d) Cough 
18. 
A 26-year old young lady attends medical emergency and is labelled as acute severe asthma 
by the emergency physician. Which one of the following is unlikely to be a part of the 
prescription? 
 
(a) Albuterol 
(b) Anti-leukotrienes 
(c) Aminophylline 
(d) Magnesium sulfate 
19. 
Consider the following statements with regard to respiratory examination: 
 
1. Change in note, when patient phonates “EEE” (Egophony) is characteristic of 
interstitial fibrosis 
2. Whispered pectoriloquy is characteristic of lung consolidation 
3. Monophonic wheeze is characteristic of asthma 
4. Hyper-resonant note on percussion is characteristic of pnemothorax 
 
Which of the above statements are correct? 
(a) 1 and 3 
(b) 2 and 4 only 
(c) 1, 2 and 4 
(d) 2, 3 and 4
===== PAGE 4 =====
20. 
All of the following are the causes of exudative Pleural Effusion, EXCEPT: 
(a) SVC obstruction 
(b) Fungal infection 
(c) SLE 
(d) Meig syndrome 
21. 
Which one of the following is NOT true about Ghrelin? 
(a) It stimulates appetite  
(b) It decreases gastric emptying  
(c) It increases acid secretion  
(d) Fasting increases its secretion  
22. 
Fecal elastase test is used for diagnosing which one of the following conditions? 
(a) Lactose intolerance  
(b) Mucosal inflammation  
(c) Bile acid secretory defects  
(d) Pancreatic dysfunction  
23. 
The recent classification system for listing a patient as a candidate for liver transplantation is: 
(a) Child Pugh score  
(b) APACHE score 
(c) MELD score  
(d) Metavir score  
24. 
The blood supply of liver consists of:  
(a) 50 % hepatic artery and 50 % portal vein  
(b) 80 % portal vein and 20 % hepatic artery  
(c) 80 % hepatic artery and 20 % portal vein  
(d) 70 % hepatic artery and 30 % portal vein   
25. 
All of the following conditions are associated with Glomerulonephritis with low complement 
level, EXCEPT: 
(a) Subacute bacterial endocarditis  
(b) IgA nephropathy  
(c) Systemic lupus erythematosus 
(d) Cryoglobulinaemia
===== PAGE 5 =====
26. 
Consider the following statements with regard to oral aphthous ulcers: 
 
1. They are superficial and painful 
2. They may occur in women just prior to menstruation 
3. Oral glucocorticoids may be needed for the treatment of severe, recurrent cases 
4. They are pre-malignant and progress over few years to squamous cell carcinoma of 
the oral cavity 
 
Which of the above statements are correct? 
 
(a) 1 and 4 only 
(b) 2 and 3 only 
(c) 1, 2 and 3 only 
(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4 
27. 
Which one of the following statements about Barrett’s Oesophagus is NOT correct?  
 
(a) It is a pre-malignant condition 
(b) Normal squamous cells lining the lower oesophagus are replaced by columnar 
cells 
(c) Normal columnar cells lining the lower oesophagus are replaced by squamous 
cells 
(d)  It is an adaptive response to chronic gastro-oesophageal reflux 
 
28. 
The most common cause of acute hepatitis outbreaks in India is: 
 
(a) Hepatitis E 
(b) Hepatitis C 
(c) Hepatitis B 
(d) Hepatitis A 
 
29. 
Spontaneous oesophageal perforation after a bout of forceful vomiting or retching is 
characteristically seen in which one of the following conditions? 
 
(a) Menetrier’s disease 
(b) Boerhaave’s syndrome 
(c) Achalasia of the oesophagus 
(d) Barrett’s oesophagus 
30. 
Eradication of helicobacter pylori infection may prove beneficial in the following extra- 
gastric disorders EXCEPT: 
 
(a) Unexplained vitamin B12 deficiency 
(b) Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura 
(c) Iron deficiency anaemia without gastro-intestinal bleeding 
(d) Acute glomerulonephritis
===== PAGE 6 =====
31. 
What is the target blood Hemoglobin level when treating anaemia in Stage-4 chronic kidney 
disease patient?  
(a) 8 to 10 gm/dL 
(b) 10 to 12 gm/dL 
(c) 12 to 13 gm/dL 
(d) 13 to 14 gm/dL 
32. 
Which one of the following complications of chronic kidney disease is observed in patients 
with low parathyroid hormone levels? 
(a) Adynamic bone disease  
(b) Tumoral calcinosis  
(c) Osteitis fibrosa cystic  
(d) Calciphylaxis 
33. 
All of the following statements about adult polycystic kidney disease are true, EXCEPT: 
(a) It is inherited as autosomal dominant trait  
(b) It is usually associated with marked proteinuria 
(c) It is usually associated with systematic hypertension, from young age  
(d) It is associated with Berry aneurysm  
34. 
Consider the following statements in relation to an adult patient: 
 
1. Oliguria is defined as passage of urine less than 300 ml per day  
2. Anuria is said to exist when less than 50 ml urine is passed per day  
3. Polyuria is defined as urine volume in excess of 3 litre per day  
 
Which of the statements given above are correct? 
(a) 1 and 3 only 
(b) 2 and 3 only  
(c) 1 and 2 only  
(d) 1, 2 and 3 
 
35. 
White cell casts in urine examination are strongly suggestive of: 
(a) Nephritis  
(b) Pyelonephritis  
(c) Renal stone disease  
(d) Papillitis  
36. 
A 13-year old boy presents with hematuria, oliguria, edema and hypertension. He has history 
of sore throat two weeks prior to presentation. Laboratory investigations are remarkable for 
low C3 and increased titres of ASO and antiDNase. Which one of the following statements is 
NOT correct about management for this condition? 
 
(a) Renal biopsy is rarely required for making diagnosis 
(b) Antibiotic treatment is given for streptococcal infection 
(c) Treatment is largely supportive 
(d) Immunosuppressants are to be used for crescentic glomerulonephritis
===== PAGE 7 =====
37. 
Which one of the following statements is NOT correct regarding the risk factors for 
nephrolithiasis? 
 
(a) Higher dietary calcium increases risk  
(b) Higher animal protein intake increases risk  
(c) Higher dietary potassium intake lowers risk  
(d) Lower urine citrate increases the risk  
38. 
A 60-year old patient is admitted in emergency with seizure, aphasia and altered sensorium. 
He has history of fever and headache for the preceding 3 days. The  CSF examination is 
unremarkable. What would be the probable diagnosis? 
(a) Multiple sclerosis  
(b) Tubercular meningitis  
(c) Pyogenic (bacterial) meningitis  
(d) Viral encephalitis  
39. 
Drug of choice for the treatment of Trigeminal Neuralgia is: 
(a) Carbamazepine  
(b) Aceclofenac  
(c) Thiamine  
(d) Prednisdone  
40. 
Constructional skills is a function of which lobe? 
(a) Dominant temporal lobe  
(b) Non dominant parietal lobe  
(c) Frontal lobe  
(d) Non dominant temporal lobe  
 
41. 
Vertical gaze palsy with convergence retraction nystagmus is seen in: 
(a) Weber syndrome 
(b) Millard Gubler syndrome  
(c) Claude syndrome  
(d) Parinaud syndrome  
42. 
A patient on looking forward was found to have his right eye deviated downwards and 
outwards with pupil dilated. He is suffering from: 
(a) Left 3rd nerve palsy  
(b) Left 6th nerve palsy  
(c) Right 4th nerve palsy  
(d) Right 3rd nerve palsy  
43. 
All of the following are features of Cauda Equina syndrome EXCEPT: 
 
(a) Low back pain 
(b) Lower limb areflexia 
(c) Loss of bladder function 
(d) Extensor plantar response
===== PAGE 8 =====
44. 
A 68-year old male presented in OPD with complaints of progressive small handwriting. On 
examination, he had resting tremor, bradykinesia, rigidity and postural instability. This 
patient is suffering most likely from: 
 
(a) Parkinson’s disease 
(b) Vascular dementia 
(c) Alzheimer’s disease 
(d) Frunto temporal dementia 
45. 
An elderly patient presents with abnormal gait. He has a wide base freezing gait with 
imbalance, comprising short strides, shuffling along the floor and difficulty with starts and 
turns. Heal-Shin test is normal. Which one of the following is most likely disorder? 
(a) Cerebellar ataxia 
(b) Sensory ataxia 
(c) Frontal gait disorder 
(d) Parkinson’s disease 
46. 
Cushing reflex, seen in conditions of raised intra cranial pressure includes all of the following 
EXCEPT: 
(a) Bradycardia 
(b) Hypertension 
(c) Irregular respiration 
(d) Hypothermia 
 
47. 
A 35 year old man presents with history of low grade fever and headache for last five weeks. 
Clinical examination is remarkable for signs of meningismus. He undergoes lumbar puncture 
(LP) and a day later reports worsening of headache. Which one of the following features is 
NOT consistent with diagnosis of “Post-LP” headache? 
 
(a) Post-LP headache usually begins within 48 hours 
(b) Post-LP headache worsens in sitting position 
(c) Post-LP headache is most severe upon waking up 
(d) Post-LP headache may improve with caffeine intake 
48. 
Which one of the following investigations is NOT appropriate in a case of recurrent 
thrombosis? 
(a) Antiphospholipid antibodies  
(b) Bcr-Abl assay 
(c) Protein C and S assays 
(d) Antithrombin level 
49. 
All of the following are causes of reactive thrombocytosis, EXCEPT: 
(a) Hemolytic anemia  
(b) Megaloblastic anemia  
(c) Post splenectomy 
(d) Chronic inflammatory disorders
===== PAGE 9 =====
50. 
Cryoprecipitate cannot be used for treatment of which one of the following conditions? 
(a) Von Willebrand disease  
(b) Hypofibrinogenemia  
(c) Hemophilia–B 
(d) Hemphilia–A  
51. 
Pyruvate kinase deficiency results in deficiency of ATP production and a chronic haemolytic 
anaemia. The disorder is inherited as an: 
 
(a) Autosomal recessive trait 
(b) X-linked recessive trait 
(c) Autosomal dominant trait 
(d) X-linked dominant trait 
52. 
Sickle cell disease may be associated with any of the following EXCEPT: 
 
(a) Acute chest syndrome 
(b) Aplastic crisis 
(c) Splenic sequestration crisis 
(d) Conn’s syndrome 
 
53. 
Fever with splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy can be seen in 
(a) Infectious mononucleosis 
(b) Chronic leukaemia 
(c) Both infectious mononucleosis and chronic leukaemia 
(d) Neither infectious mononucleosis nor chronic leukaemia 
54. 
Every individual carries four alpha gene alleles. Deletion of three alleles leads to 
development of: 
(a) Haemoglobin X disease 
(b) Haemoglobin H disease 
(c) Haemoglobin F disease 
(d) Hydrops fetalis 
55. 
Which one of the following is NOT true regarding Chronic Myeloid Leukaemia (CML)?  
(a) It is a clonal malignancy of haematopoetic stem  
(b) Risk of developing CML is increased in monozygotic turns 
(c) CML is defined by presence of BCR-ABL 1 fusion gene 
(d) 10 year survival with TKI therapy is 85%
===== PAGE 10 =====
56. 
Diagnostic criteria of multiple myeloma includes which of the following? 
 
1. Increased malignant plasma cells in the bone marrow 
2. Serum and/or urinary M protein 
3. Skeletal lytic lesions 
4. Skeletal blastic lesions 
 
Select the correct answer using the code given below: 
(a) 1, 2 and 3 
(b) 1, 3 and 4 
(c) 1, 2 and 4 
(d) 2, 3 and 4 
57. 
The most predominant type of serum immunoglobulin involved in patients with plasma cell 
disorder is: 
(a) Ig G 
(b) Ig A 
(c) Ig D 
(d) Light chains 
58. 
Which one of the following statements is NOT true regarding the thyroid function/disorder in 
pregnancy? 
(a) There is an increase in the metabolism of thyroxine by placenta  
(b) Hyperemesis gravidarum may be associated with thyrotoxicosis in pregnancy  
(c) Levothyroxine replacement therapy dose should be decreased by 30–50% early in 
pregnancy  
(d) Impaired cognitive impairment may be seen in the offspring of mother with 
subclinical hypothyroidism   
 
59. 
Which one of the following is NOT the criterion for the diagnosis of Diabetes mellitus? 
(a) Symptoms of diabetes and random plasma sugar concentration ≥ 200 mg/dL 
(b) HbA1c ≥ 6.5 %  
(c) 2-hours plasma glucose ≥ 200 mg/dL during an oral glucose tolerance test  
(d) Fasting plasma glucose ≥ 110 mg/dL  
60. 
A young lady presents in outdoor clinic with complaints of menstrual irregularity, weight 
gain, hair loss, tiredness and weakness. What will be the investigation of choice? 
(a) FSH & LH level  
(b) Estrogen level  
(c) Free T3 and free T4 level  
(d) Free T4 and TSH level
===== PAGE 11 =====
61. 
Consider the following statements about erectile dysfunction in diabetic males: 
 
1. It affects 60 % of males  
2. Its common cause is an underlying neuro-vascular  pathology  
3. It may be aggravated by beta-adrenergic agonist drugs  
4. Endocrine disorders like hyperprolactinemia may cause it 
 
Which of the statements given above are true? 
(a) 1 and 2 
(b) 2 and 3  
(c) 2 and 4 
(d) 3 and 4  
62. 
All of the following can cause Hyperprolactinemia, EXCEPT:  
(a) Craniopharyngioma  
(b) Hyperthyroidism  
(c) Stress  
(d) Chronic renal failure  
63. 
All of the following can be seen in a case of thyrotoxicosis, EXCEPT: 
(a) Atrial fibrillation 
(b) Periodic paralysis 
(c) Deafness  
(d) Osteoporosis  
64. 
Which one of the following hormones acts via the receptor tyrosine kinase? 
(a) FSH 
(b) TSH 
(c) IGF-1 
(d) PTH 
65. 
Consider the following disorders as constituent of Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2a      
(MEN 2a): 
 
1. Primary Hyperparathyroidism 
2. Pituitary tumours 
3. Medullary carcinoma of thyroid 
4. Pheochromocytoma 
 
Which of the above are correct?: 
 
(a) 1, 2 and 4 
(b) 1, 2 and 3 
(c) 1, 3 and 4 
(d) 2, 3 and 4
===== PAGE 12 =====
66. 
Consider the following statements with regard to Graves’ ophthalmopathy : 
 
1. Proptosis is often asymmetric and can even appear to be unilateral 
2. It is a clinical diagnosis 
3. Worsening of symptoms upon glucocorticoid withdrawal is common 
4. Radiation therapy is very effective in treatment 
 
Which of the above statements are correct? 
 
(a) 1 and 2 only 
(b) 1, 2 and 3 
(c) 2, 3 and 4 
(d) 1 and 4 only 
67. 
All of the following are common aetiologies of delirium EXCEPT: 
(a) Hyperthyroidism 
(b) Hypothyroidism 
(c) Hyperparathyroidism 
(d) Hypoparathyroidism 
68. 
Key anthropometric measurements important for evaluating the degree of obesity are: 
 
(a) Weight, height and waist circumference 
(b) Weight, height and hip circumference 
(c) Weight, height and mid-thigh circumference 
(d) Weight, height and chest circumference 
69. 
What is the minimum BMI (Body Mass Index) recommended for considering adjuvant 
pharmacologic treatment in obesity with comorbidity? 
(a) 23 kg/m2 
(b) 25 kg/m2 
(c) 27 kg/m2 
(d) 30 kg/m2 
70. 
A young medical student while working in HIV ward got pricked accidently on the finger by 
a syringe needle which was used to draw blood from a patient. Patient’s infection status is not 
known. Which one of the following therapeutic interventions will be the best interest of this 
student? 
(a) To start Dolultegravir immediately  
(b) To wash wound with soap and water and start Emtricitabine  
(c) To give Dolutegravir + Tenofovir + Emtricitabine  
(d) To give Dolutegravir + Tenofovir + Emtricitabine + HBV Immunoglobulin  
71. 
Cryptococcal infection is acquired through: 
(a) Inhalation route  
(b) Bite of Culex mosquito  
(c) Direct skin contact  
(d) Ingestion of spores
===== PAGE 13 =====
72. 
Which one of the following is NOT appropriate treatment for Echinococcus granulosus and 
hydatid disease? 
(a) Albendazole 400 mg twice in a day for 3 months  
(b) Diethylcarbamazine 2 mg/kg thrice in a day for 12 days 
(c) PAIR (percutaneous puncture, aspiration, injection of scolicide, reaspiration)  
(d) Praziquantel (20 mg/kg twice daily for 14 days) 
73. 
Which one of the following infections is NOT amenable to post-exposure prophylaxis with 
specific immunoglobulins? 
(a) Hepatitis B 
(b) HIV 
(c) Tetanus 
(d) Rabies 
74. 
Echinocandins are a class of: 
(a) Antiviral agents 
(b) Antiparasitic agents  
(c) Antitubercular agents 
(d) Antifungal agents 
75. 
Recommended first time drug for initial treatment of tuberculosis include all EXCEPT: 
(a) Isoniazid 
(b) Rifampin 
(c) Ethambutol 
(d) Ethionamide 
76. 
The most frequent adverse reaction of significance among people treated for drug-susceptible 
tuberculosis is: 
(a) Colitis 
(b) Hepatitis 
(c) Cystitis 
(d) Enteritis 
77. 
All adult patients in whom anti-tubercular treatment is being started should undergo baseline 
assessment of: 
(a) Complete blood count 
(b) Liver function test 
(c) Lipid profile 
(d) Pulmonary function test 
78. 
A 30 year old male presents with fever, headache, anorexia, nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea. 
On examination tongue is coated with abdominal tenderness, soft splenomegaly, relative 
bradycardia and rose spots rash. The most likely diagnosis is: 
 
(a) Malaria fever 
(b) Enteric fever 
(c) Leptospirosis 
(d) Dengue fever
===== PAGE 14 =====
79. 
The extrapulmonary sites most commonly involved in tuberculosis are all EXCEPT: 
(a) Lymph node TB 
(b) Genitourinary TB 
(c) Skeletal TB 
(d) Skull TB 
80. 
Which of the following is NOT a clinical feature of Botulism? 
(a) Impaired alertness 
(b) Dysphagia 
(c) Diplopia 
(d) Ptosis 
81. 
Post exposure prophylaxis (PEP) for HIV should contain: 
(a) 2 antiretroviral drugs administered for 4 weeks 
(b) 2 antiretroviral drugs administered for 6 weeks 
(c) 3 antiretroviral drugs administered for 4 weeks 
(d) 3 antiretroviral drugs administered for 6 weeks 
82. 
Paralytic rabies is characterized by: 
(a) Maculopapular rash 
(b) Flaccid muscle weakness 
(c) Spastic muscle weakness 
(d) Hyperexcitability and facial weakness 
83. 
All of the following are seen in Marasmus EXCEPT: 
 
(a) Reduced triceps skinfold 
(b) Reduced mid arm circumference 
(c) Protein wasting 
(d) Decreased body mass index 
84. 
A 20 year young lady presents with high grade fever for five days and palpable purpura over 
extremities. She is found to be confused, with presence of neck stiffness. Which of the 
following is the most likely diagnosis? 
(a) Disseminated intravascular coagulation 
(b) Acute meningococcemia 
(c) Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome 
(d) Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 
85. 
Fibroblast Growth Factor 23 (FGF 23) is increased in which one of the following conditions? 
(a) Osteomalacia 
(b) Osteoporosis 
(c) Paget’s disease  
(d) Renal Osteodystrophy
===== PAGE 15 =====
86. 
Which of the following crystals are deposited in a case of pseudogout? 
(a) Monosodium urate 
(b) Calcium phosphate 
(c) Cholestrol crystals 
(d) Calcium pyrophosphate dehydrate (CPPD)  
87. 
Which of the following features are associated with poor prognosis in Diffuse Cutaneous 
Systemic Sclerosis? 
 
1. Older age 
2. A high gas transfer factor for carbon monoxide (TLCO) 
3. Proteinuria 
4. Diffuse skin disease 
 
Select the correct answer using the code given below: 
(a) 1, 2 and 4 
(b) 3 and 4 only 
(c) 1, 3 and 4 
(d) 1, 2 and 3 
 
88. 
Which of the following statements regarding pegloticase are correct? 
 
1. It is enzyme conjugate 
2. It is useful in chronic Gout management 
3. The main adverse effects are infusion reactions and development of antibodies 
 
Select the correct answer using the code given below: 
(a) 1 and 2 only 
(b) 2 and 3 only 
(c) 1 and 3 only 
(d) 1, 2 and 3 
89. 
The most common cause of sensorineural hearing loss in adults is: 
(a) Otosclerosis 
(b) Meniere’s disease 
(c) Presbycusis  
(d) Meningitis  
90. 
A 50-year old male presents with dizziness. Which one of the following clinical findings does 
NOT favour a central cause? 
(a) Poor saccades 
(b) Gaze evoked nystagmus  
(c) Inhibition by visual fixation  
(d) Presence of diplopia, dysarthria
===== PAGE 16 =====
91. 
A young primigravida with 11 weeks pregnancy presents with sudden onset pain and 
swelling of left lower limb. Homan’s sign is positive. Duplex ultrasonogram shows non-
compressibility of veins in the affected region, with absent flow. The drug of choice for 
treatment is: 
(a) Enoxaparin 
(b) Amoxycillin–Clavulanic acid   
(c) Warfarin  
(d) Limb elevation only  
92. 
All of the following are clinical features of hypovolaemic shock EXCEPT: 
(a) Cold clammy skin 
(b) Bradycardia 
(c) Hypotension 
(d) Oliguria 
93. 
Which one of the following is most appropriate to describe classic heat stroke?  
(a) Patients core body temperature rises above 44°C with headache, nausea and loss of 
consciousness  
(b) Patients core body temperature rises above 40 °C with muscle tremors, confusion, 
loss of consciousness  and loss of sweating 
(c) Patients core body temperature rises above 38 °C with increased sweating, 
tachypnoea, tachycardia and loss of consciousness  
(d) Patients core body temperature is above 40 °C with disorientation, increased 
sweating, peripheral vasodilation, tachycardia and loss of consciousness  
94. 
Which of the following is NOT a priority in the initial management of shock from venomous 
snake? 
 
(a) Aggressive volume resuscitation 
(b) Vasopressor support 
(c) Anti-venom administration 
(d) All of these are undertaken simultaneously 
 
95. 
Which one of the following is NOT an appropriate criterion for diagnosis of Systemic 
Inflammatory Response Syndrome (SIRS)? 
(a) Respiratory rate > 20/mm 
(b) Heart rate > 90/min 
(c) Total leucocyte count > 16 ൈ 109  per Litre 
(d) Temperature > 38 0C
===== PAGE 17 =====
96. 
All of the following predispose to Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome EXCEPT: 
(a) Acute Pancreatitis 
(b) Toxic gas inhalation 
(c) Aspiration of gastric contents 
(d) Severe Bronchial asthma 
97. 
An 8 year old child has consumed a few tablets of a drug that were being taken by his mother 
on a regular basis. Following this the child develops gastric necrosis, acidosis, shock and 
hepatic necrosis. Which is the most likely drug? 
(a) Multivitamins 
(b) Calcium carbonate 
(c) Folic acid 
(d) Iron 
98. 
A newborn weighing 1.5 kg at birth presents at 6 hours of age with lethargy, weak and high 
pitched cry and difficulty in feeding. What is the next step in management? 
 
(a) Estimation of blood sugar 
(b) Estimation of serum calcium 
(c) Supplementary oxygen 
(d) Bedside electrocardiogram 
 
99. 
In a child with acute organophosphorus poisoning, which one of the following drugs will act 
as anti-sialogogue and peripheral parasympatholytic agent? 
 
(a) Carbamates 
(b) Atropine 
(c) Benzodiazepine 
(d) Pralidoxime 
100. 
A 6-year old child needs to undergo a central Catheter placement for total parental nutrition. 
The procedure is likely to evoke pain and anxiety. Which of the following is the most 
appropriate drug for sedation and analgesia in this child? 
 
(a) Chloral hydrate 
(b) Midozolam 
(c) Propofol 
(d) Ketamine 
101. 
Which one of the following is the drug of choice in a child presenting with supraventricular 
tachycardia? 
 
(a) Atropine 
(b) Lidocaine 
(c) Adenosine 
(d) Nalaxone
===== PAGE 18 =====
102. 
Which one of the following drugs is used in cardiopulmonary resuscitation for pulseless 
ventricular fibrillation? 
 
(a) Atropine 
(b) Adenosine 
(c) Lidocaine 
(d) Amiodarone 
103. 
Which one of the following is a sign of good attachment during breastfeeding? 
(a) The baby’s nose is at the level of the nipple 
(b) The baby’s chin touches the breast  
(c) Most of the nipple is in the mouth and the lower areola is visible 
(d) The baby’s lower lip is inverted  
104. 
Which one of the following signs is NOT included as an indicator of a vigorous baby 
immediately after delivery of an infant born through meconium strained liquor? 
(a) Pink colour 
(b) Strong respiratory efforts 
(c) Good muscle tone 
(d) Active movements of the baby 
105.   
All are true for a Cephalohematoma in a newborn EXCEPT: 
(a) It is located over the parietal bones in the subcutaneous plane 
(b) It may be associated with hyperbilirubinemia  
(c) It increases in size in the first 12–24 hours  
(d) It can take 3–6 weeks to resolve  
106. 
Which of the following sick neonates can be started on “Minimal Enteral Feeding”, if 
hemodynamically stable? 
(a) Septic neonate with sclerema 
(b) Neonate with necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) 
(c) Neonate on mechanical ventilation 
(d) Symptomatic hypoglycaemia  
107. 
Which one of the following drugs is contraindicated in a mother who is breastfeeding her 
infant? 
(a) Bromocriptine 
(b) Chlorpromazine  
(c) Acyclovir 
(d) Morphine  
108. 
A term neonate presents with tachypnea on day 1 after birth. The chest X-ray reveals 
hyperexpanded lung fields, prominent vascular markings, and prominent interlobar fissure. 
Which of the following is the most probable diagnosis? 
(a) Congenital lobar emphysema 
(b) Diaphragmatic hernia 
(c) Transient tachypnea of the newborn 
(d) Tracheoesophageal fistula
===== PAGE 19 =====
109. 
A pre-school boy can go upstairs on alternate feet and has also started copying a circle. How 
many blocks should he be able to build a tower with, without toppling over? 
 
(a) 5 
(b) 7 
(c) 9 
(d) More than 10 
 
110. 
Which one of the following drugs is the antidote for benzodiazepine poisoning? 
 
(a) Flumazenil 
(b) Atropine 
(c) Naloxone 
(d) Pralidoxime aldoxime methiodide 
 
111. 
A 3-year old child develops severe respiratory distress after inhalation of fumes arising from 
burning plastic. The child is started on supportive ventilation. Which one of the following 
antidotes needs to be given? 
(a) Hydroxycobalamin  
(b) Amylnitrate  
(c) Sodium nitrite  
(d) N-acetyl cysteine 
112. 
A child has an incurving of the little finger. What is this condition known as? 
(a) Camptodactyly 
(b) Brachydactyly 
(c) Partial cutaneous syndactyly 
(d) Clinodactyly 
113. 
A 4-week old infant presents with repeated episodes of non-bilious vomiting since 7 days. 
The infant seems active and hungry after the vomiting. Examination reveals an olive-shaped 
mass in the epigartrium. Which metabolic abnormality is expected in this infant? 
(a) Hyperchloremia 
(b) Metabolic alkalosis 
(c) Hyperkalemia 
(d) Hyponatramia 
114. 
Which one of the following is the correct dose and route of administration of hepatitis B 
vaccine in children? 
 
(a) 0.5 mL dose with 10 microgram of antigen subcutaneously 
(b) 0.5 mL dose with 10 microgram of antigen intramuscularly 
(c) 1 mL dose with 5 microgram of antigen subcutaneously 
(d) 1 mL dose with 5 microgram of antigen intramuscularly
===== PAGE 20 =====
115. 
Which one of the following statements is correct for approved acellular pertussis vaccine?  
(a) It contains at least 3 IU of inactivated pertussis toxin  
(b) It contains at least 3 pathogenic pertussis antigens 
(c) It’s efficacy is superior to the whole cell pertussis vaccine  
(d) Presence of nonfimbrial protein is a mandatory component  
116. 
Which of the following is recommended in the follow up health visits of a child with Down 
syndrome? 
(a) Growth assessment twice a year in the first year and annually till 5 years 
(b) Annual auditory screening from 1 to 5 years 
(c) Screening for refractory error if visual impairment is suspected 
(d) Annual thyroid function test from birth to 2 years 
117. 
A 12 year old child presents with delayed puberty and delayed bone age. His growth records 
reveal that he was growing normally till 1 year of age, after which both his height and weight 
fell to below the third centile for age. Subsequently, he continued to grow below the third 
centile with normal height velocity. What is the most likely diagnosis? 
(a) Familial short stature  
(b) Constitutional growth delay  
(c) Growth hormone deficiency  
(d) Skeletal dysplasia   
118. 
According to the ‘Integrated Management of Neonatal and Childhood Illnesses’ (IMNCI) 
classification of young infants upto 2 months, which one of the following signs is NOT 
included in ‘Possible Serious Bacterial Infection’  
(a) Fast breathing (50 breaths or more per minute) 
(b) Severe chest indrawing 
(c) Axillary temperature less than 36.5 0C 
(d) Movement only when stimulated or no movement at all 
119. 
Neonatal tetanus elimination in India is defined as less than one case per: 
 
(a) 100 live births per year 
(b) 1000 live births per year 
(c) 10000 live births per year 
(d) 100000 live births per year 
120.  
Which one of the following facilities has been established at district hospitals in India to 
strengthen the care of low birth weight babies and sick newborns? 
(a) Special Newborn Care Units (SNCU) 
(b) Newborn Treatment Units (NTU) 
(c) Newborn Stabilization Units (NSU) 
(d) Shishu Suraksha Units (SSU)