
===== PAGE 1 =====
• 
I.F.S. EXAM-(M)2017 	
41-1\mi DETACHABLE 
GEOLOGY 
Paper II 
Maximum Marks: 200 
Time Allowed: Three Hours 
QUESTION PAPER SPECIFIC INSTRUCTIONS 
Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting questions. 
There are EIGHT questions in all, out of which FIVE are to be attempted. 
Question Nos. 1 and 5 are compulsory. Out of the remaining SIX questions, THREE are to be 
attempted selecting at least ONE question from each of the two Sections A and B. 
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck off, attempt of a question 
shall be counted even if attempted partly. Any page or portion of the page left blank in the 
Question-cum-Answer Booklet must be clearly struck off 
All questions carry equal marks. The number of marks carried by a question/part is indicated 
against it. 
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only. 
Neat sketches may be drawn, wherever required. 
SECTION 'A' 
—a 100 
Symbols 
— 2-fold axis of symmetry 
o — upper hemisphere projec-
tion of a face pole 
x — lower hemisphere projec-
tion of a face pole 
+a wo 
Which crystallographic system does the crystal represented by the stereogram 
above belong to? What faces constitute pinacoid form? What form do the general 
faces {hk1} belong to? Which of the projected faces are parallel to the c-axis ? 	
8 
1 	
fsi-d-gly
===== PAGE 2 =====
What are the two crystal-systems in which Mg-Fe and Ca-pyroxene crystallize? 
How do these two types of pyroxene be distinguished based on their optical 
properties? 	
8 
Describe magmatic differentiation and epithermal mineral characters. 	8 
A sedimentary sequence of 2 km thickness shows shallow water deposition from 
top to bottom. How do you explain it ? 	
8 
How a foreland basin is formed at the foot of a mountain belt ? 	
8 
1300 
1100°C 
A 
2.(a) 
1500 
1550°C 
0 5 10 	
20 	
30 	
40 	
50 	
60 	
70 	
80 	
90 95 100 
Albite 	
cot% 	
Anorthite 
In the given Albite-Anorthite phase-diagram liquid of A composition begins to 
crystallize at 1500°C. What would be the composition of first crystallized 
feldspar? What would be the composition of liquid and solid at the last stage of 
crystallization under equilibrium condition? If the equilibrium between liquid 
and solid is not maintained, what texture of plagioclase is likely to result? 	
10 
A rock of pelitic composition containing muscovite, chlorite, quartz and 
Na-plagioclase would belong to which metamorphic facies ? How does this mineral 
assemblage change on progressive metamorphism to higher grade? 	10 
Describe the formation of sand dunes with a suitable sketch. 	
10 
What is the use of heavy minerals in sedimentology ? 	
10 
fsi-d-gly 	
2
===== PAGE 3 =====
What metamorphic structures and textures a rock of basaltic composition would 
develop during progressive regional metamorphism? 	
10 
How can mineral assemblage of a basaltic rock be shown on a triangular ACF 
diagram? Explain the rationale behind the calculation of A in the ACF diagram. 
What is the maximum number of phases possible in a two component system 
according to the standard phase-rule? 	
1 0 
l(c) 	
How depositional environment is determined from sedimentary rocks. 	
10 
3.(d) 	
Describe the sedimentary structures. How they can be used to determine the order 
of superposition? 	
10 
Olivine crystallizes in space group Pbnm. What crystallographic information do 
you derive from this space group symbol? How does olivine in a mid-oceanic-
ridge basalt alter? Mineral formula of an olivine is given below. Express this in 
end-member composition: 
Fe2+6 Fe0.04 
g1.80 1
3+ M 	
S*0-96 Al0.4 04 	
10 
0.1 	 .-.  
Explain in brief the optical properties of minerals in thin sections that can be 
studied under transmitted light using a petrological microscope. 	
10 
Describe the classification of sedimentary rocks based on grain size. 	
1 0 
Describe the difference between alluvial fan, flood plain and delta. 	1 0 
SECTION 'B' 
5. 	
Write short notes on the followings: 	
5x8=40 
Red Sea Mineralisation. 	
8 
Supergene alteration of sulphide deposits. 	
8 
Placer deposits. 	
8 
Coordination number and its relation to the cation-anion radius ratio in a crystal 
structure. 	
8 
Uttarakhand natural disaster of June 2013. 	
8 
What are the characteristics of Volcanics-associated Massive Sulphide (VMS) 
deposits? Discuss about the mineralogy and texture of VMS deposits. 	
1 0 
How does coal form in nature ? Why economic deposit of coal is not expected to 
develop in Precambrian formations? Briefly describe the distribution of Gondwana 
coal in Peninsular India. 	
1 0 
Trace elements can be classified into compatible and incompatible elements. What 
is the basis of such classification? 	
1 0 
Describe the important aspects of geochemical prospecting. 	
1 0 
3 	
fsi-d-gly
===== PAGE 4 =====
• 
What are the major minerals of manganese? Write a note on manganese deposits 
of Sausar Group, India. 	
10 
Why Banded Iron Formations (BIF) are restricted to Precambrian time? Enumerate 
the characters of Lake Superior type BIF. 	
1 0 
How does volcanic activity affect climate? What types of volcanoes are more 
hazardous and how? 	
10 
Describe the basis for open cost and underground mining. 	
10 
What are the major ore minerals of aluminium and why do their composition vary 
with time? Discuss about the controls of ore localisation of bauxite through 
residual concentration. 	
10 
What are the characteristic features to recognize any Proterozoic-type carbonate-
hosted Pb-Zn deposit? Write a note on the sulphide deposits of Rajpura-Dhariba, 
Rajasthan. 	
10 
How does the urbanization affect groundwater recharge? How can the recharge be 
increased? 	
1 0 
What is a radioactive waste and why is it hazardous? Discuss the waste isolation 
versus waste disposal strategies for the radioactive waste. 	
1 0 
fsi-d-gly 	
4