
===== PAGE 1 =====
T.F.S, EXAM-(M) 2018 
FSI-D-FSTY 
FORESTRY 
Paper -II 
Maximum Marks : 200 
Time Allowed: Three Hours 
Question Paper Specific Instructions 
Please read each of the following instructions carefully before attempting 
questions: 
There are EIGHT questions in all, out of which FIVE are to be attempted. 
Questions no. 1 and 5 are compulsory. Out of the remaining SIX questions, THREE are 
to be attempted selecting at least ONE question from each of the two Sections A and B. 
Attempts of questions shall be counted in sequential order. Unless struck off attempt of a 
question shall be counted even if attempted partly. Any page or portion of the page left 
blank in the Question-cum-Answer Booklet must be clearly struck off 
All questions carry equal marks. The number of marks carried by a question/part is 
indicated against it. 
Answers must be written in ENGLISH only. 
Neat sketches may be drawn, wherever necessary. 
FSI-D-FSTY
===== PAGE 2 =====
SECTION A 
Ql. 
(a) What is the importance of surveying in forestry ? Discuss different 
methods of surveying to solve the forestry field problems. 
What is sustained yield ? Mention the positive and negative aspects 
related to sustained yield. 
50 equi-productive coupes are to be worked out for 2000 hectares of 
forest under clear felling system with the following densities: 
Area (ha) 	
Densities 
600 	
Normal density 
400 	
0.75 density 
800 	
0.50 density 
200 	
0.25 density 
Find out the number of coupes in different densities. 
Give the classification of forest roads. What features are required for a 
reconnaissance for forest roads? 
What are the forest stock maps ? Discuss the details shown in stock 
maps for a working plan report. 
Q2. 
(a) What are the precautions required for diameter measurements with 
calipers ? Discuss the errors that occur due to non-observation of the 
precautions. 	
15 
What is growing stock? How is normal growing stock calculated in clear 
felling system based on final MAT? 	
15 
Define rotation. Explain different types of rotation with special reference 
to ecological, industrial and economical benefits. 	
10 
Q3. 	
(a) Define working plan. Discuss objectives and scope of a working plan. 
Describe salient features of a good working plan. 	
15 
What is increment ? Discuss different types of increments. Discuss the 
graphical relationship between current annual increment and mean 
annual increment. 	
15 
Define volume tables and give their classification. 	
10 
FSI-D-FSTY 	
2
===== PAGE 3 =====
Q4. 	
(a) 	
Define forest management. Give its objectives. How does the attitude of 
the owner put impact on the management of forests? 	
15 
Define forest sampling. Give advantages of sampling Discuss different 
types of non-random sampling methods used in forestry. 	
15 
Define remote sensing. Discuss its application in forest management 
along with GIS applications. 	
10 
FSI-D-FSTY 	
3
===== PAGE 4 =====
SECTION B 
Q5. 
 
What are the industrial uses of gums and resins ? Discuss the factors 
affecting the production and supply of gums and resins. 
8 
 
What is carbon sink ? How do forest soils act as important carbon sinks? 
8 
 
Forest ecology is the study of complex interactions between organic and 
inorganic components of the forest ecosystem. Explain organic and 
inorganic components providing two examples of each as they relate to 
the forest ecosystem. 
8 
 
What is the ecological and economical importance of biodiversity ? 
Mention the salient measures for conservation of biodiversity. 
8 
 
Write down four advantages of timber seasoning and suggest which one 
is commercially suitable over other methods, with suitable examples. 
8 
Q6. 
 
List out different types of preservatives used for protection of timber 
against fungi and insects and classify them based on solvent used. 
15 
 
How is enumeration of animal population in natural forests carried out 
in general ? Also specify the method(s) adopted in the case of tigers. 
15 
 
What is succession and climax? Give the causes of forest succession. 
10 
Q7. 
 
Define ethnobotany. Write in detail about the role of ethnobotany in 
modern medicine and its approaches to the drug industry. 
15 
 
What are the objectives of Joint Forest Management (JFM). Give 
methods used for preserving forest resources through JFM. 
15 
 
Enlist the common and scientific names of trees and shrubs (seven each) 
having medicinal importance in ethnobotany. 
10 
Q8. 
 
What are the key elements of the wood industry and paper industry 
strategies ? Explain. 
15 
 
What are the main differences between forest policy and forest laws ? 
Give salient points of the National Forest Policy of 1952 and 1988. 
15 
 
Describe the defects that appear during seasoning in timbers. 
10 
FSI-D-FSTY 	
4